5.8 X-Ray Absorption Techniques

INTRODUCTION
X-Rays are absorbed by matter and the intensity is attenuated. The degree of absorption (absorbance) depends on the wavelength of the X-rays as well as the thickness, density, atomic number, and the local structure of the absorber. Figure 5.8.1 1 shows typical X-ray fluorescence spectra measured by an energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence (EDXRF) spectrometer, a Shimadzu EDX-700 desktop spectrometer, 2 which has Zr, Al, Ti, Ni, and polymer filter to absorb part of the primary X-rays. The X-ray tube is a Rh anode tube. The sample is a 1000 ppm cadmium standard solution for atomic absorption spectrometry, which is in a sample cell with a Mylar film window. Without a Zr filter, the Cd Kα peak (23.2 keV) cannot be observed because the Rh Kβ peak (23.1 eV) overlaps. The Cd Kα peak becomes observable with the use of the Zr filter. The Zr K absorption edge is at 18.0 keV, which corresponds to the sharp edge at 18 keV in the spectrum in Figure 5.8.1. The Zr filter effectively absorbs the Rh Kα and Kβ X-rays, which are not used to excite the Cd X-ray fluorescence, but the high energy continuum X-rays go through the filter to excite the Cd. This kind of automatic spectrometer has now a quantitative analysis computer program including the effect of X-ray absorber filter with an automatic change of the filter. The computer code also includes the effect of 6 µm thickness Mylar window X-ray absorption and air absorption of the X-ray path in the spectrometer. We can successfully obtain the Cd concentration of the sample solution. The filter technique is also widely used in PIXE (particle induced X-ray emission), radioisotope X-ray analysis, 3 and X-ray absorption spectroscopy using the X-ray fluorescence yield method.
The interaction between X-rays and matter is classified into absorption, elastic scattering, and inelastic scattering. The basic physical formula of X-ray absorption are described elsewhere. 4 -6 The physical constants, such as X-ray absorption coefficients or equivalently the imaginary part of the atomic scattering factor are listed elsewhere. 4 -9 The relation among the imaginary part of the atomic scattering factor, the imaginary part of the refractive index, the linear absorption coefficient, and the mass absorption coefficient, are concisely described in the literature. 4,6,7 The measurement and interpretation of the X-ray absorption coefficients as the change of the X-ray energy are called the X-ray absorption spectrometry or spectroscopy. Since most of the materials analysis techniques using the X-ray absorption phenomena have already been described in the Encyclopedia of Analytical Chemistry 4 the present subchapter is devoted to the concise summary and addenda to the Encyclopedia.
X-Ray absorption spectroscopy is referred to as XANES (X-ray absorption near edge structure) and EXAFS (extended X-ray absorption fine structure) (Figure 5.8.2). 10 XANES refers to the fine structure about 50 eV around the edge. EXAFS is used for the oscillating fine structure from 50 to 1000 eV above the absorption edge. The Fourier transform of this EXAFS oscillation yields a X-Ray Spectrometry: Recent Technological Advances. Edited by K. Tsuji, J. Injuk and R. Van   10 Incident X-ray intensity (i 0 ) is also shown, which has saw-teeth like structure due to the undulator gap change. The EXAFS spectrum (heavy solid line) after being normalized with respect to the incident X-ray intensity has a smooth oscillation but no discontinuity.
Reproduced by permission of Electrotechnical Laboratory radial distribution function of the X-ray absorbing atom. The XANES spectra represent the electronic structure of the conduction band. XAFS (X-ray absorption fine structure) is the generic name for XANES and EXAFS. XAS (X-ray absorption spectroscopy) is less used than XAFS, but has a similar meaning.

BASICS FOR XAFS
XAFS has a long history since de Broglie and a summary is given by Lytle. 11 The 10th International Conference on XAFS was held in Chicago in 1998, 12 the 11th at Ako, Japan in 2000, 13 and the 12th at Malmö, Sweden in 2003 (near to the Swedish synchrotron radiation facility MAX lab). 14 Other earlier international conferences and their proceedings are listed elsewhere. 4 We can obtain information on the activity of the XAFS Society as well as analysis programs and other scientific issues through The International XAFS Society web page. 15 The XAFS Publications Database is freely accessible (Figure 5.8.3). The fundamental review of X-ray spectrometry is published in even years in a journal, 16 and X-ray absorption spectroscopy is included. XAFS is classified into two different spectroscopies, XANES and EXAFS, as described above. EXAFS is a structural analysis method, and thus it has similarities to X-ray diffraction data analysis, such as the requirement for standardization methods. The multiple scattering method is the major method of EXAFS analysis. 17,18 XANES, which is also called NEXAFS (near edge X-ray absorption fine structure), is analysed by molecular orbital or band structure calculations, and is similar to the soft X-ray emission/fluorescence line shape analysis. 19 -24 The basic measurement method is common to these two spectroscopies, EXAFS and XANES. The monochromatized incident X-ray intensity (I 0 ) is measured, and the X-ray intensity transmitted through a specimen (I ) is measured. The valuelog(I /I 0 ) is plotted versus the incident X-ray photon energy.

EXTREME CONDITIONS
The measurement of XAFS is now a routine experiment for local structure or electronic structure characterizations. Therefore techniques to measure the XAFS spectra under extreme conditions, such as high pressure and/or high temperature, have been developed.
With a combination of an atomic absorption spectrometer and XAFS spectrometer, Nakai et al. 25  High temperature solid phase (3000 K), 26 high temperature liquid phase (3000 K), 27 and both high temperature (1650 • C) and high pressure (2000 bar) supercritical fluids 28 have been measured. The effect of temperature was interpreted through the Debye-Waller factor 29 and anharmonic vibration. 30,31 Isotope effect, though

COMBINATION WITH SCANNING TUNNELING MICROSCOPES
When the X-rays are absorbed, secondary quanta will be created by the energetic X-ray photons. Probing these secondary quanta using a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) or scanning capacitance microscope, 33 -38 high spatial resolution microscopes will be realized in the near future, though the present spatial resolution is only 1 mm or less. Figure 5.8.6 shows a schematic diagram of the experimental set-up for STM-XAFS. 35 Capacitance measurements can be performed both with scanning and without scanning mode as shown in Figure 5.8.7. 38 We can change the bias potential in these tunneling or capacitance probe methods.  35 Reproduced by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Ltd information on the electronic and local structures with an atomic scale using these techniques.

COMBINATION WITH OPTICAL LUMINESCENCE
When X-rays are absorbed, visible light is emitted from the sample. This is called the X-ray excited optical luminescence (XEOL). Its intensity depends on the absorbance, but does not directly depend on it, because of very complicated relaxation processes. 4 Its wavelength depends on the analyte. Ce measured with single bunch synchrotron radiation as an input, 39 which was regarded as a delta function in the time domain. When a narrow time window is selected in the decay line shape, for recording the XAFS spectra, some optical relaxation process corresponding to the time delay can be probed, because some optical processes are delayed depending on its transition probability, or in other words, lifetime of an excited state. When a narrow wavelength window is selected in the optical luminescence spectra, a chemical species can be probed. By selecting these time and wavelength windows at the same time, a novel characterization method will be realized. Porous materials, 40 nanoparticles 41 and optically active materials 42 are suitable targets for the XEOL method. The line shape measured by the luminescence yield is usually broader than those of the total electron yield XAFS spectra. 43 The XEOL-XAFS can easily be performed using a conventional grating optical spectrometer (either by a step scan type or a position sensitive detector type) at the synchrotron radiation beam line. The detection limit is low compared with the transmission method. Though the thickness or concentration of a film specimen should be adjusted to yield a strong XAFS modulation in the conventional X-ray transmission measurement, the XEOL is measurable even for bulk samples.

COMBINATION WITH X-RAY FLUORESCENCE
When the stronger incident X-rays are absorbed, the stronger X-ray fluorescence is emitted. Therefore the X-ray fluorescence intensity is a measure of absorbance. This type of measurement is called the X-ray fluorescence yield (XFY) method. The XFY method has been used with an X-ray detector such as a photodiode or a proportional counter without wavelength selection. The X-ray detector is placed close to the sample and the total X-ray fluorescence intensity is measured. Jaklevic et al. 44 pointed out in 1977 that the XFY method was quite sensitive down to 10 19 atoms/cm 2 concentrations. This value has become several orders of magnitude lower after 25 years. De Groot pointed out that, by the use of a wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometer, spin-state selective XAFS spectra could be obtained. 24 The Kβ' XFY and Kβ 1,3 XFY spectra of early transition metal compounds yield the minority and the majority spin state XAFS spectra separately.
Muramatsu et al. 45 measured XFY-XAFS spectra by two parts of an X-ray fluorescence spectrum using a grating spectrometer (Figure 5.8.9).  45 To put a blind mask on a part of the position sensitive detector makes it possible to measure the XAFS spectra of a certain X-ray fluorescence line yield method. This is also electrically possible, because the output of a position sensitive counter is usually pulse height signal dependent on the position  46 . Reproduced by permission of Adv. X-ray Chem. Anal. Japan total XFY, Ni Lα and Lβ partial X-ray fluorescence yields, the difference of these two, and the total electron yield (TEY). 46 X-Ray fluorescence spectra show chemical shift due to the difference in effective charges. Therefore the XAFS spectra yielded by the chemical-shifted X-ray fluorescence peaks can be obtained. Izumi et al. 47 measured site-selective XANES spectra utilizing the chemical shift of Cu Kα 1 between Cu on ZnO and Cu metal in a catalyst. The signal from a position sensitive X-ray detector in an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer has a relation; electric voltage to the position. Therefore we can obtain the partial X-ray fluorescence yield XAFS spectra by the use of discrimination of electric pulses using an electric circuit, without using a mechanical mask on the position sensitive detector, which was used by Muramatsu et al. 45 The resonant Raman scattering peak is observable when the incident X-ray energy is just below the absorption edge. The remarkable feature of the X-ray Raman peak is that the line width is narrower than the X-ray fluorescence, though the transition from the Raman peak to the X-ray fluorescence is continuous. Utilizing this phenomenon, XAFS spectra free from lifetime broadening can be obtained. 48 -50

PHOTOCONDUCTIVE AND ELECTROCHEMICAL MEASUREMENTS
The electrical conductance of a solid changes with the change of the wavelength of the incident X-rays. This is because the valence electrons are excited into the conduction band and thus the density of conduction electrons changes, or, an atom, whose core electron is photoionized, behaves as an impurity in the metal. The response of conductance is thus sometimes positive and sometimes negative. 51 Compared with solid samples, liquids are suitable to measure the conductivity with the change of the incident X-ray wavelength. Sham and Holroyd 52 used a liquid cell with electrodes, and measured the change of the conductivity of (CH 3 ) 4 Sn in trimethylpentane near the Sn K edge. The behavior of conductivity was positive for low concentration (0.07 M) but negative for high concentration (0.10 M). This behavior also depends on the structure of the sample liquid cell. Though the interpretation is very complicated, we can get information on the liquid or solution using XAFS spectra.
Many kinds of electrochemical cell or in situ cell for EXAFS measurements were proposed and are summarized by Sharpe et al. 53 Yamaguchi et al. 54 used an in situ electrochemical cell designed by Heineman's group 55 to measure unstable chemical species synthesized during a redox reaction and thus very difficult to stabilize them without applying the electric potential. They measured XAFS spectra of a Mn IV /Mn III system at several points in a cyclic voltammogram.
Nakai et al. 56,57 measured the XAFS spectra of a lithium battery electrode during charge-discharge processes using an in situ cell as shown in Figure 5.8.11. 56 They observed the chemical shift of the strongest absorption peak (the so-called white line) during the charge-discharge process, emergence of pre-edge structure, which means the change of coordination structure, and the change of atomic distances from the Fourier transform of the EXAFS data.
The stainless steel corrosion process was analysed using an electrochemical cell by the measurement of EXAFS. 58

TOTAL REFLECTION XAFS
Heald et al. 59 proposed measuring a buried CuAl 2 layer in an Al(100 nm)/CuAl 2 (5 nm)/Cu(100 nm) multilayer using the glancing angle incident XAFS. Adjusting the glancing angle, the signal from a buried layer could be maximized due to the interference effect between the incident and reflected X-rays. Recently, Shirai et al. 60 and Kawai et al. 61 developed the total reflection XAFS method. Most total reflection papers have been cited in Kawai et al. 62 Figure 5.8.12 63 shows the schematic probing and information depth of total reflection XAFS. The TEY method is more surface sensitive than the X-ray fluorescence yield method. Figure 5.8.13 64 shows the use of polarization of the incident X-rays for the determination of the orientation of adsorbates on a substrate. Sample holders 65,66 and an X-ray detector 67 suitable for the measurement of polarized total reflection XAFS were developed. Polarization total reflection XAFS has been used to study structure transformation of a Pt cluster on  63 The critical angle of X-ray total reflection is denoted by δ c . Total reflection geometry can reduce the probing depth by several orders of magnitude, achieving a surface-sensitive excitation. Reproduced by permission of International Union of Crystallography an Al 2 O 3 substrate 68 and molybdenum oxide on a single crystal. 69 The X-rays emitted from a bending magnet of a synchrotron light source is polarized in such a way that the electric vector is parallel to the horizontal plane. Thus the electric dipole moment in this plane in a sample can be easily excited and thus the X-rays are strongly absorbed when a column of atoms is present in this direction. Figure 5.8.14 70 shows π and σ orbital components in Cu K XANES spectra of an oxide superconductor single crystal by adjusting a crystal axis to the electric vector of the incident X-rays. This experiment was not a total reflection, but similar to the total reflection method in such a way that both methods used the polarization of X-rays. When L 3 edge spectra are measured with polarized X-rays, the orientation of the empty d band can be determined, 71 because the 2p-3d electric dipole transition is dominant over the 2p-4s transition. The polarization dependent XANES spectra of the L 2,3 edge of a TiO 2 single crystal are also observable. 72 Different thermal treatment of a Nb/Al interface was studied by the total reflection EXAFS. 73 Total electron yield XANES under a total reflection condition was measured for Cr thin films on Fe. 74 The small change of the incident glancing angle makes it possible to change the probing depth. This will be a powerful tool to characterize the depth-selective analysis of multilayer samples. The total reflection X-ray method is suitable for the characterization of liquid surfaces, e.g. a metal stearate Langmuir monolayer on a metal ion aqueous solution. 75 Figure 5.8.15 shows a schematic illustration of the experimental set-up. 76 Usually the conversion electron yield method using He gas, a schematic illustration of which is shown in Figure 5.8.16, is used to measure the spectra. 77 Applications of XANES spectroscopy to solutions have been summarized by Sakane. 78 X-Ray reflectivity is an alternative method to measure the XAFS spectra. When the absorption is stronger, the reflectivity becomes weaker, and vice versa. Therefore the X-ray reflectivity intensity is a replica of the XAFS spectra. 79,80 An anodic silver oxide film treated in situ electrochemically is measured by the reflectivity method. 81 The total reflection experimental set-up also reduces the self-absorption effect, 82,83 as shown in Figure 5.8.17. 83 The self-absorption effect heavily smears the XAFS spectra when the X-ray fluorescence yield method is used.

ELECTRON AND OTHER SECONDARY YIELD METHODS AND THEIR SURFACE SENSITIVITY
When X-rays are impinging on a surface and absorbed, then photoelectrons, consequently Auger electrons or X-ray fluorescence, and secondary electrons are emitted. These electrons are generated both in deep places where the incident X-rays reach, as well as in the shallow surface region. Therefore the detection of these electrons, or alternatively the measurement of the sample electric current (this method is called the TEY method), was thought to be bulk sensitive. Recently it has however been clarified that the electrons emitted from the sample surface, or the sample electric current, are both surface sensitive. This evidence has been independently found by several researchers. 61,84 -86 The mechanism and difference of the TEY (sample electric current), secondary electrons, and Auger electrons are described in Kawai 4 and a detailed analysis is reported in Erbil et al. 87 The signal to background ratio of the total reflection X-ray TEY method was estimated by Zheng and Gohshi. 88 The conversion electron yield method, under atmospheric conditions 89,90 was compared with the TEY method, using the total reflection X-ray method in order to change the probing depth. 91 The surface sensitivity of the TEY method, where the majority of the detected electrons are so-called secondary electrons (kinetic energy is less than 50 eV), is approximately 2 nm, which is comparable with the photoelectron inelastic mean free path. The ion yield method is no longer a difficult technique because a channeltron electron multiplier can be used. 92 Energy dispersive incident X-rays (described later in Figure 5.8.33) on the surface are used as the excitation source. In this experiment, the emitted Auger electrons are detected by a position sensitive electron detector after the energy selection by a hemispherical electron energy analyzer, as shown in Figure 5.8.18. 93 An Auger electron yield XANES spectrum can be obtained with one shot. A surface sensitive XANES spectrum can be thus quickly measured. These electron yield methods are not suitable for measuring insulators. However, as shown in Figure 5.8.19, 94 with the use of an electron flood gun as well as an Ar ion gun, and also with an electron yield detector equipped with an electron energy filter to avoid the effect of low energy electrons from the flood gun, the electron yield XAFS spectra become observable for insulators. 95 The coincidence spectra are observable by the use of e.g. Auger electron yield and XFY. This kind of coincidence method is useful to clarify the electron transition process in a single atom. We can still obtain chemical information on both the surface and bulk separately for environmental samples such as aerosol or flyash, where the electron yield (surface sensitive) and XFY (bulk sensitive) are measured in one scan. 4

STRONG FIELD EFFECTS
XAFS are measured for a sample with the application of a strong field, such as laser light or a magnetic field. With a combination of an external field, we can obtain a new chemical information on the sample.  16 Mechanism of conversion electron yield method using helium gas. Taken from Harada et al. 77 Reproduced by permission of Japan Society for Analytical Chemistry Figure 5.8.20 shows a schematic illustration of the transition in the pump-probe XAFS method. 96 Using strong laser irradiation, most of the valence electrons are excited and X-ray absorption spectra of the optically activated state can be measured.
The EXAFS measurement of a glassy sample during laser irradiation has been reported. 97 The EXAFS data of a glassy sample show that the structure is changed temporarily or permanently by the laser irradiation.
We can obtain a magnetic property of a sample by the measurement of XAFS spectra in a strong magnetic field as shown in Figure 5.8.21. 98 The X-rays from an undulator in a synchrotron  94 Reproduced by permission of Japan Society for Analytical Chemistry radiation facility can be polarized in such a way that the electric vector of the incident X-rays are circulated clockwise or counter-clockwise with respect to the magnetic field applied to the sample. This is also achieved by a phase retarder, such as a λ/4 wavelength slab. The absorption coefficient is slightly different for these two polarizations of the incident X-rays. The transmitted X-ray intensity as well as the X-ray fluorescence intensity show the X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD).  102 Recently a monoatomic wire was characterized using XMCD. 103 Yokoyama et al. 104 studied carbon monoxide adsorbed on nickel and cobalt thin layers using  96 An electron in a valence band (VB) is excited into a conduction band (CB) by laser light pumping, and the XAFS spectra of such a system are measured using the XFY method.

Reproduced by permission of International Union of Crystallography

X-Ray
Ion chamber

Ion chamber
Magnetic fields Sample 45°F igure 5.8.21 Schematic diagram of an experimental layout for the measurement of magnetic circular dichroism X-ray absorption fine structure. Taken from Nakamura et al. 98 XMCD and clarified the interaction between the magnetization film and CO unoccupied orbital π * , which had orbital magnetic moments.
The XMCD experiment will be useful, when combined with the grazing incident technique, for the characterization of thin multilayer films made by changing the parameters (temperature, pressure, concentration, etc.) in a processing method.  105 Reproduced by permission of Elsevier

MICROSCOPY
Microscopy and imaging of various samples using the X-ray absorption techniques are summarized in Figure 5.8.22; 105 the techniques used are the microbeam scanning technique (the sample is moved in the real experiment) and tomography technique. Transmission-type microimaging without an X-ray optical lens has been widely used. Microscopes using a soft X-ray lens (Figure 5.8.23 106 ) have also been extensively used. 107,108 The scanning microbeam method is usually combined with µ-X-ray diffraction 109 -112 or X-ray fluorescence 113,114 beamlines in a synchrotron radiation facility. The principle of X-ray microtomography is shown in Figure 5.8.22(b), which also utilizes the X-ray absorption effect. The X-ray absorption spectra can be obtained by a synchrotron microtomography set-up. 115 Figure 5.8.24 105 shows µ-Xray absorption spectroscopic tomography of a U fuel particle collected from Chernobyl soils. The image of a cross-section of the fine particle can be numerically reconstructed. Oxidation states of the particle can be determined from the chemical shift of the XANES spectra. The spatial resolution of laboratory microtomography is not better than synchrotron radiation microtomography, but it is now less than 0.1 µm. 116 Figure 5.8.25 shows the inner structure of a lithium electric battery measured by laboratory microtomography developed by Hirakimoto. 117 Desktop microtomography has also been developed. 118 XANES microscopes have been used to study geological and environmental samples, 119 -122 bio and organic materials which show phase separation, 123 -125 and adsorbates which are studied using X-ray linear dichroism microscopy. 126 The microbeam analysis method has the potential to be used as a screening method in combinatorial chemistry using an integrated microchemical chip. 127

EELS, ELNES AND EXELFS
Electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) is a technique used in transmission electron microscopy (TEM), where electrons transmit through a thin film and energy absorbed by the thin film during transmission is measured by an electron energy analyser. EELS is classified into energy loss near edge structure (ELNES) and extended energy loss fine structure (EXELFS). This classification is similar to XANES and EXAFS. When the electron energy is measured in the forward direction, the  105 . Reproduced by permission of Elsevier selection rule of an electron transition in an atom is similar to that of an optical (X-ray) transition, i.e. the electric dipole selection rule. Thus the resulting EELS spectra can be interpreted in the same way as the X-ray absorption spectra. 128 -130 The presence of the extended fine structure in EELS spectra was found by Leapman et al. 131 and they coined the term 'EXELFS'. EELS measurements are suitable for low energy loss, such as light elements (B, C, N, and O) and soft X-ray lines (L edge of Si and transition metals 132 -134 ). This is because an overlap of the spectra is avoidable among different elements for low energy losses. EELS has the potential to detect a single atom spectrum of even a biological structure, 135 because the resolution of a transmission electron microscope becomes as high as an atomic level spatial resolution.

EXEFS
Very weak fine structures are always found at the low energy side of strong characteristic X-ray fluorescence or X-ray emission lines. The intensity is usually less than 1 % of the Kα main line. These fine structures are called the 'radiative Auger satellites'. Kawai et al. 136,137 pointed out that the overall line shape of the radiative Auger satellites is similar to that of XAFS spectra and the Fourier transform of the radiative Auger satellites yields a radial distribution function. 136 They coined 'EXEFS' for the use of the radiative Auger satellites to measure XAFS spectra. 137 The EXEFS method is now occasionally used with an EPMA (electron probe microanalyser) 138 -140 for chemical state mapping or imaging, and microarea chemical state analysis.   of aluminum oxides, α-and γ -Al 2 O 3 , bayerite and gibbsite. 140 These aluminum oxides contain similar elements, thus the discriminations among these different phases are not achieved only by the elemental mapping using the characteristic X-ray lines. However, with the use of EXEFS we can obtain an image due to the difference in phase.
Recently a wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometer was equipped with an EXEFS analysis computer program as shown in Figure 5.8.27. 141 Basic studies on the radiative Auger spectra compared with the Auger electron spectra 142 have become active after the emergence of the EXEFS method. The reason why the EXEFS spectra coincide with the XAFS spectra was at the first stage not clear, but an exact theory has been proposed using a T-matrix expansion; 143 the phase shift is slightly different from the true EXAFS analysis. EXEFS in X-ray fluorescence spectrometry is used to investigate environmental samples because such samples are sometimes very difficult to insert into an ultrahigh vacuum chamber at the synchrotron radiation facility. 144

DAFS
Diffraction anomalous fine structure (DAFS) is an alternative method to measure the XAFS spectra proposed by Stragier et al. 145 The imaginary part of the X-ray scattering factor is closely related to the X-ray absorption coefficient, and thus the measurement of the X-ray diffraction peak by changing the X-ray energy reveals an EXAFS-like oscillation. This method has diffraction peak selectivity, which means that the site or phase selective information is obtainable. The measurement of Ti K XAFS spectra in BaTiO 3 is always interfered with by the overlap of the close Ba L 3 edge, but this interference is avoidable by using the DAFS method. 146

THEORY AND INTERPRETATION OF XAFS SPECTRA
Though the contribution from many electron excitations in XAFS spectra was suggested more than 20 years ago, 147 this effect was not seriously considered until recently. These multiple-excitation phenomena were studied by Ito et al. 148 for Br - in organic solvents and by Magnuson et al. 149 for nickel metal. These more-than-one electron excitation signals are a source of spurious noise in the analysis of XAFS spectra 150 .
'Atomic XAFS' has been said to exist in XAFS spectra. It is another origin of a step-like structure in EXAFS spectra. Usually EXAFS oscillation is due to the condensed matter effect; the outgoing photoelectron wave interferes with the backscattered waves by its neighboring atoms. Therefore, the EXAFS signal is not observable for an isolated single atom. However, the shape of the potential of a single atom itself has the effect to backscatter the electron wave and some kind of interference pattern with longer period than the EXAFS oscillation is observable. The structures observed in an isolated single atom EXAFS are interpreted both from the view point of double-electron excitation and from atomic XAFS; the existence of 'atomic XAFS' is still controversial. 151,152 The relativistic effect is also an important factor for the analysis of XAFS spectra. One of the longstanding theoretical problems was that the absence of a sharp absorption line (i.e. white line) in the L 2 XANES of Pt metal, though L 3 has a sharp absorption line. This problem has been solved by the inclusion of the relativistic effect. 153 All kinds of computer calculation programs of XAFS spectra are accessible through the International XAFS Society (http://ixs.csrri.iit.edu/). One of the most widely used programs is the FEFF series. 154 The newest version is FEFF8. FEFF is a computer program for ab initio multiple scattering calculations of EXAFS and XANES spectra for a cluster molecule. The FEFF8 code includes relativistic Dirac-Fock atomic calculation, selfenergies, a fully relativistic cross-section, polarization dependence, and many other features.
Another class of computation code is the molecular orbital (MO) method expressed by a linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAOs). The discrete variational Xα (DV-Xα) method is most convenient in the LCAO-MO method, while the multiple scattering Xα (MS-Xα) method is the basis of the FEFF and other multiple scattering methods. The DV-Xα method can calculate the core-hole relaxation state easily. This is the reason why the DV-Xα method is extensively used. The LCAO-MO method including the DV-Xα method is only applicable to XANES (below 50 eV above the absorption edge) spectra, though the multiple scattering methods are applicable to both XANES and EXAFS spectra. Jiang and Ellis 155 calculated the XANES spectra of various Co compounds using the DV-Xα method. The molecule SF 6 has been a reference material for more than 30 years 156,157 in experiments as well as a check for a computer code. 158,159 The measured spectra are satisfactorily reproduced by the DV-Xα calculation for the SF 6 molecule. XANES spectra of transition metal complexes, 160,161 silicon oxides 129 and oxyanions 162 are well interpreted by using the DV-Xα method.
The core-hole effect is an important factor to interpret mixed valence compounds. According to the calculation of Suzuki et al., 163 the number of 3d electrons in the late transition metal compounds increases by one electron after the creation of a core hole. Contrary to this, that of the early transition metal compounds does not change before and after the creation of the core hole, as is shown in Figure 5.8.28. Therefore the interpretation of the valency or oxidation number of transition metal compounds is very controversial, especially for Co compounds. 164 'White line' is the name given to the strongest sharp lines in XANES spectra, because these lines develop white when the X-ray spectra are recorded on photographic film. The intensity ratio of the white lines is closely related to the occupancy of valence orbitals, as shown in Figure 5.8.29. 165 The white lines in oxygen K absorption spectra of transition metal oxides (Figure 5.8.30 166 ) are also interpreted in a similar way, though the charge-transfer effect 163 and other effects 167 should be included.
The pre-edge structure is a good index of the chemical environment of the X-ray absorbing atom. It is strong for tetragonally coordinated transition metals, but weak for octahedrally coordinated transition metals. The pre-edge structure is sometimes assigned to the 1s-3d electric quadrupole transition, but the relation to Kβ 5  168 -170 should be studied more extensively.

STANDARDIZATION
The standardization of EXFAS spectra and their numerical processings are important in the practical   166 The shaded area is assigned to the oxygen p character in the transition 3d band use of EXAFS spectroscopy. This is similar to X-ray diffraction data standardization. The EXAFS spectra measured at many synchrotron beamlines and measured by laboratory spectrometers should be compared with each other. The white line intensity is related to the coherence of the incident X-rays. 171 The problem of the standardization of EXAFS spectra has been discussed with comparison of calculation codes 172 and standard spectra. 173 The International XAFS Society has a committee for the standardization of EXAFS measurements and data analysis. The committee report can be read at http://ixs.csrri.iit.edu/. The report includes: Many methods have been devised for the analysis of XAFS data. Taguchi and White 174 proposed the use of a crystal structure database to simplify the modeling problem in EXAFS analysis. A rapid calculation method using parallel computation has been proposed. 175 The second derivative of the XANES spectra reveals a doublet structure when the raw spectra themselves look similar. 176 Cross-correlation analysis of binary mixtures (Co 3 O 4 and CoAl 2 O 4 ) of EXAFS spectra is used to obtain a quantitative analysis of each component. 177 The EXAFS analysis of Co 3 O 4 and CoAl 2 O 4 has no problem, but XANES analysis should include the charge-transfer effect and spin flip phenomena due to the creation of a core hole. 163,164 Many kinds of empirical parameters are proposed to classify the complicated Cu and Co XANES spectra. 178,179 Diffraction peaks sometimes contaminate the EXAFS spectra as is shown in Using a numerical method, a diffraction-free EXAFS spectrum (Figure 5.8.31d) is available.

INSTRUMENTATION AND SPECTROMETER
A typical synchrotron beamline for XAFS measurement (Figure 5.8.32) can be found in a beamline manual, 181 where a sample is inserted between two ion chambers. To scan the incident X-ray energy, the double-crystal monochromator is stepscanned. A mirror effectively excludes the higher order X-ray reflection. The step-scanning method needs time to scan, and thus energy-dispersive geometry is developed to measure the XAFS spectra by one shot as shown in Figure 5.8.33. 182 Laboratory EXAFS spectrometers are commercially available 183,184 as shown in Figure 5.8.34, which looks like an X-ray diffractometer. The laboratory EXAFS machines use rotating anode high power X-ray tubes such as reported by Sakurai 185 and recently a parabolic cylinder mirror has been used. 186 The commercially available spectrometers are usually modified versions of spectrometers developed in academic institutions. 187 -189 The specimen in these laboratory XAFS spectrometers is moved with a change in the incident X-ray energy but the X-ray tube is fixed. Therefore, complicated experiments using a cryogenic cooler or high temperature furnace are very difficult to perform. To overcome these difficulties, a new spectrometer where the sample is fixed and the X-ray tube moves has been developed. 190 A soft X-ray synchrotron beamline for XAFS measurements looks like an electron spectrometer, such as an ESCA (electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis) instrument. This is because the soft X-ray beamline (less than 1 keV) requires a windowless system due to the strong absorption coefficients of any type of X-ray windows. Therefore the sample chamber is directly connected to the synchrotron main ring without a window. Consequently the samples allowed into the sample chamber are very limited because of the ultra high vacuum system. However, recently using a thin film such as BN, liquid samples have been measurable 191 at ALS (Advanced Light Source).

SUMMARY
X-ray absorption techniques are used in commercially available film thickness process monitors, which are used in plating, printed circuit and magnetic disk processes. Though these process monitors are not spectrometers, because only thin film  filters are used to select the X-ray wavelengths, they are used in a variety of industries.
On the other hand, X-ray absorption spectrometers are used in both laboratories and synchrotron facilities for basic science, such as surface science, 192,193 cluster chemistry 194 and electron correlation in transition metal oxides. 167 Other applications are in electrodes, 195,196 biological samples, 197 catalysts, 198 especially in situ reaction conditions, 199,200 industrial materials, such as flat panel displays, 201 geological samples 202 and environmental analysis. 203 -205 An unknown chemical, called 'manganese blue', has been characterized by Mn L XANES and concluded to be a mixture of Mn 4+ :Mn 6+ = 1:1, which was believed to be Mn 5+ before the XANES analysis. 206 A simple method for fabricating uniform and large area X-ray absorption filters from powder materials has been published. 207 The X-ray absorption techniques described in the present section are summarized using three key words, namely probe, signal and field. The probes used at present are X-rays and electrons; the X-rays are sometimes polarized and sometimes totally reflected. The detected signals are transmitted X-rays, X-ray fluorescence, electrons, electric currents, and many other measurable signals such as ions, reflectivity, and energy selected X-rays or electrons. The number of fields are becoming remarkably greater, such as high temperature, high pressure, low temperature, in situ chemical reaction, strong magnetic field, applying an electric potential, short measurement time, and plasma state, using the timescale selection such as coincidence or delay. New opportunities are proposed from time to time. 208 After the absorption of X-rays, the de-excitation processes we consider are usually X-ray fluorescence and Auger, but nuclear excitation by electron transition (NEET) has been actively studied recently. 209 -211 The NEET is, in other words, a nuclear Auger process. The nuclear energy level is excited by the inner shell electron transition. Recently, it was found that the γ -radiation rate was accelerated by the absorption of X-rays above the absorption edge. This kind of X-ray absorption can be applied to shorten the lifetime of radioisotopes.
One of the shortcomings of X-ray absorption spectroscopy was that absorption spectra of all the elements were not measurable using one beamline. This shortcoming has been overcome in many beamlines at many synchrotron facilities and X-ray absorption spectroscopy has become a powerful tool for the analysis of practical samples.
