History and Progress of X-Ray Absorption Fine Structure (XAFS)

Table 1. 1 The history and progress of XAFS (continued) eV after XANES) as shown in Fig. 1.2 (described in Chap. 2 in detail). XANES is associated with the excitation process of a core electron to bound and quasi-bound states, which is especially sensitive to oxidation state (valence) and coordination symmetry of the absorbing atom. EXAFS oscillations are approximately expressed by the sum of the sinusoidal functions of many shells on the basis of single scattering theory involving multiscattering effect by Eq. (1.1), which is usually used as a fitting function.
ð1:1Þ where k, S 2 0 , R i , N, F, ϕ, λ, and σ represent photoelectron wave vector, reduction factor by multiple scattering effect, ith species at distance R, coordination number, back scattering amplitude function, phase shift function, mean free path of photoelectron, and Debye Waller factor, respectively. EXAFS can provide structural information on bond distance, coordination number, and atomic species of the neighbors of the absorbing atom. Thus, XAFS can determine the chemical state and local bonding structure for a selected atomic species. XAFS can be applied to any sorts of functional materials such as catalysts, sensors, biomaterials, fuel cells, secondary batteries, electronic devices, optical and magnetic devices, thin films, nano-medicines, etc. without requirement of long-range ordering in structures, in any atmospheres such as gas phases, liquids, solids, vacuum, reaction conditions, etc., at low-high temperatures, for any mixtures and composites. XAFS has great advantages in deciding molecular-level structures and electronic states of a variety of materials not only in a static state but also in a dynamic state (in situ/operando conditions), which are not possible by other techniques due to their theoretical and experimental analysis limitations. With these advantages as base, the weak points of XAFS are also noted as follows. The XAFS information is one dimensional one averaged over all absorbing atoms with different local structures and environments involved in a sample. The XAFS curve-fitting analysis is not precise in contrast to XRD analysis; e.g., error ranges of bond distance and coordination number are at least AE0.001 nm and AE10 %, respectively, for most samples of catalysts, nanoparticles, and surfaces. Although the XAFS curve-fitting results involve those error ranges, the XAFS techniques can provide significant structural parameters and electronic states for catalysts, nanoparticles, and surfaces in static and dynamic states, to which other modern physical techniques cannot be applied. Thus, the XAFS techniques have the unique and large advantages enough for scientific discussion on the physical and chemical properties of functional samples, but the XAFS analysis results may be further exactly discussed with the aid of other complementary experiments and theoretical calculations.
XAFS has had a great impact on catalyst research, identifying short-range structures and electronic states of many catalytic systems with nanocrystalline, Fig. 1. 2 The spectra and origin of XANES and EXAFS noncrystalline, or disordered phases [1][2][3]. The essence of catalytic functions and understanding of catalysis may be well characterized by advanced XAFS techniques, which have not been adequately addressed so much [4][5][6]. Pioneering XAFS works on supported metal catalysts were conducted by Lytle and his coworkers in 1970 years [7][8][9][10]. Typically, supported metal particles have usually particle sizes in the range of 1-2 nm diameter without long-range order and hence their structures cannot be targets with XRD. van't Blik et al. studied Rh clusters on Al 2 O 3 by EXAFS before and after CO adsorption [11]. They found that the Rh clusters with a Rh-Rh distance of 0.265 nm were disrupted to monomeric Rh atoms bonded to the surface through oxygen after CO adsorption. Sato et al. reported the first molecular structure of a supported catalyst with Mo dimer, determining both metal-metal bonding and metal-light element bonding at the surface [12]. In 1985, Iwasawa et al. reported the first example of in situ characterization of a SiO 2supported Mo dimer catalyst during the course of selective oxidation of ethanol to acetaldehyde with O 2 using an in situ XAFS cell as shown in Fig. 1.3 [13]. In the in situ XAFS observations the catalyst was treated under the ethanol reaction conditions and quenched by rapid cooling for the observation of key intermediate structures relevant to the catalytic reaction kinetics (see Chap. 21). XAFS has now become routinely used to elucidate the local structures and oxidation states of catalytic materials. XAFS techniques have developed and become essential tools in investigating chemical and physical states of practically real samples with higher Fig. 1. 3 An in-situ XAFS cell for XAFS measurements during catalyst fabrication and catalytic reaction processes complexity. For example, the electrocatalysis of polymer electrolyte fuel cells (PEFC) for automobiles proceeds at surface layers of small Pt nanoparticles on carbon support in a wet multiphase reaction field under potential-operating PEFC conditions. Recently, the practically real PEFC catalysts were directly measured and visualized by in situ time-resolved XAFS and spatially resolved nano-XAFS imaging techniques to understand and improve the PEFC performance and degradation, whereas they cannot be characterized by other analysis methods, such as XRD, TEM/SEM, SPM, XPS, FT-IR, Raman, ultrafast laser spectroscopies, etc. [14][15][16][17].
Finally, science and technology is the wisdom and spirit obtained by humanity through the long history of evolution and is the biggest contributor to the optimization of society. Through the diligent construction of modern science and technology we can build a sustainable society. We have great expectations for advanced XAFS and related techniques for catalysts, nanomaterials, and surfaces in our life and future. The following chapters treat with fundamentals, recent applications, and future prospects of XAFS.
Formally, the theory of XAS is based on Fermi's golden rule
which requires a summation over exact many-body final states F j i, with energies E F . However, practical calculations depend on the reduction of this relation to an effective, independent particle theory that takes into account several important many-body effects. The theoretical advances in recent years are the result of an improved understanding of these effects and accurate new approximations, in particular for inelastic losses and vibrational damping [6]. These developments rely on physics beyond the usual independent-particle approaches of quantum chemistry and condensed matter such as Hartree-Fock or density functional theory (DFT). Moreover, they involve different limits and time-scales, requiring a variety of approximations and computational methods like Green's function and Lanczos techniques. Besides XAS, these advances are applicable to a number of corespectroscopies involving electronic excitations, including non-resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (NRIXS, also called X-ray Raman scattering or XRS) [7], and electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) [8][9][10][11]. In this chapter we review these advances, focusing on the ideas behind the key approximations needed for a quantitative theory of EXAFS (Sect. 2.1) and XANES (Sect. 2.2). Section 2.3 contains a review of modern XAFS analysis methods, and Sect. 2.4 a number of illustrative structural modeling applications.

The EXAFS Equation
One of the key developments in the history of EXAFS was the famous equation of Sayers, Stern, and Lytle, which represents the normalized fine structure χ ω ð Þ ¼ μ ω ð Þ À μ 0 ½ =μ 0 in XAS in terms of oscillatory contributions from near-neighbor atoms. Here μ 0 is the jump in the XAS at the edge. Although their model was heuristic, it included two key many-body effects, namely the mean free path of the photoelectron and vibrational damping [12]. This key observation demonstrates both the failure of any independent particle interpretation and the need to include both electronic and vibrational effects in quantitative theories. It also shows that XAS is a short-range order phenomenon, and cannot be described using conventional band-structure methods. Remarkably, an exact treatment based on the multiple-scattering (MS) path expansion can be cast in a similar form [1], namely
except that all quantities are redefined to include curved-wave and many-body effects implicitly. In particular f eff is the effective curved wave scattering amplitude for a given photoelectron wave number k defined relative to the absorption threshold (or Fermi level μ) for X-ray absorption, i.e., with k2 ¼ 2 E À μ ð Þ, λ k the inelastic mean free path, and σ 2 R the mean square relative vibrational amplitude of path R. The sum is over all multiple scattering paths, R being the half-path length, S 2 0 the manybody reduction factor which is typically about 0.8 as discussed below, and Φ k a smoothly varying phase shift. Remarkably, the expansion generally converges rapidly away from the edge, with only of order 10 2 multiple-scattering paths in the EXAFS. This simplification is a consequence of the smallness of λ k which is generally of order 5-20 Å. This representation also explains why the dominant peaks in the EXAFS Fourier transform
are close to the geometrical near-neighbor distances in a material, but shifted by system dependent phase shifts, δR % 1  2 dΦ k =dk. Moreover this MS path representation permits an analysis of experimental XAFS signals in terms of geometrical and vibrational properties of a material, provided one has a reasonable approximation of the phase shifts and λ k .

Many-Body XAS Formula
Perhaps the easiest way to incorporate many-body effects is to follow the two-step approach derived by Campbell et al. [13]. The first step is the production of the photoelectron, by photoexcitation from a particular core-state, given by an effective one-body (i.e., quasi-particle) absorption μ 1 ð Þ ω ð Þ. Second is the effect of inelastic losses and secondary excitations, e.g., plasmons and electron-hole pairs, that can be represented by an energy-dependent "spectral function" A ω; ω 0 À Á , which subsequently broadens and shifts the spectrum. This yields an exact representation of the many-body XAS in terms of a convolution μðωÞ ¼ ð dω 0 Aðω, ω 0 Þ μ ð1Þ ðω À ω 0 Þ: ð2:3Þ
The shape of the spectral function A ω; ω 0 À Á typically consists of a sharp "quasiparticle" peak of width related to the inverse mean free path, together with a broad satellite. Consequently the EXAFS problem can be factored into two parts: an effective quasi-particle XAS μ 1 ð Þ ω ð Þ and a part that accounts for inelastic losses. The quasi-particle XAS can be calculated using an independent-particle Fermi's golden rule, with the ΔSCF approximation, i.e., with the final single-particle states f i calculated with the final state Hamiltonian in the presence of the core-hole
where d ¼ Ẽ Á r is the dipole operator and P the projection operator onto unoccupied states. Although this is a considerable simplification to Eq. (2.1), the calculation and summation over final states in the golden rule is a serious computational bottleneck at high energies: the sum can only be carried out efficiently for highly symmetric systems such as atoms, small molecules, or periodic solids. On the other hand, many systems of interest lack symmetry. Reciprocal space (i.e., band structure) methods [14,15] often ignore the effects of the core-hole and lattice vibrations, which spoil crystal translation symmetry, although the former can be treated approximately with super-cell approximation. Instead, different methods are needed. Remarkably, it is preferable computationally to re-express the XAS in terms of the photoelectron Green's function or propagator G in real space rather than explicitly calculating the final states. This formulation implicitly sums over all final states as can be seen by using the spectral representation of G for which
; so that the golden rule can be rewritten exactly as a single matrix element μ ð1Þ ðωÞ ¼ À 1 π Im ⟨cjd Gðr, r 0 , EÞ d 0 jc⟩: ð2:5Þ
This approach turns out to be advantageous for XAS calculations even in perfect crystals, since inelastic losses (i.e., the mean free path) limit the range probed by XAS experiment to clusters typically of order a few hundred atoms about a given absorption site.

Real-Space Multiple-Scattering Theory
We now briefly summarize the real-space multiple scattering (RSMS) theory used for practical calculations of EXAFS. The starting point of the theory is the separation of the potential into contributions from "scattering potentials" v R localized on each atomic site R,
Here v 0 coul is the Hartree potential calculated for the final state in the presence of a core hole, and Σ E ð Þ is the energy-dependent self-energy. With this separation and the approximation of local spherical symmetry at each site, the propagator is also separable
so that the expression for the XAS can be reduced to a calculation of atomic-like dipole-matrix elements M L ¼ c E Á r j jLR h iand matrix elements of G r; r 0 ; E ð Þ.
where L ¼ l; m ð Þdenotes the angular momentum variables at each site R. Here and elsewhere we interchangeably use either the photoelectron energy E or the photon frequency ω to characterize the photoelectron energy. Interestingly, the relativistic generalization, which is needed for heavy atoms like Pt [16], is identical in form but with relativistic angular momentum variables k; m ð Þ. Relativistic corrections are essential for the treatment of spin-orbit effects, which are biggest in the atomic cores and hence crucially important for the transition matrix elements in heavy atoms. However, relativity has only weak effects on scattering of non-relativistic electrons in EXAFS. In FEFF, relativistic effects and spin-orbit corrections are treated to high accuracy using a relativistic Dirac-Fock prescription [17]. In addition the calculation of the scattering potentials at each site simplifies for electrons even of moderate energy (i.e., above about 10 eV of kinetic energy), where the scattering depends strongly on the density in the core of an atom, and hence spherical symmetry is an excellent approximation. Thus, self-consistency is not usually important in calculations of scattering in EXAFS. It is needed, however, to obtain an accurate estimate of the threshold (or Fermi energy E F ) and fractional occupations of the various valence states.
In RSMS, the propagator G LL 0 E ð Þ naturally separates into intra-atomic contributions from the central atom G c and multiple scattering contributions from the environment G sc , so that G ¼ G c þ G sc . Consequently, the XAS μ naturally factors as
where χ is the X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS). Thus the net structure in the XAS μ depends both on the atomic background μ 0 ω ð Þand on the fine structure χ due to MS: χ ¼ Im Tr m G sc LL 0 . Since μ 0 ω ð Þ varies weakly with energy, these results are consistent with the experimental definition of the normalized XAFS χ ¼ μ À μ 0 ð Þ=Δμ 0 , where Δμ 0 is the jump in the atomic background absorption at threshold. Formally, the matrix G LL 0 E ð Þ can also be expressed as a sum over all MS paths that a photoelectron can take away from the absorbing atom and back [2], and thus gives rise to the multiple-scattering path expansion
where the successive terms represent single, double, . . . scattering processes and δ and δ 0 are partial-wave phase shifts. As noted above, this expansion converges rapidly for EXAFS with of order 10 2 paths. Remarkably, the sum sometimes converges adequately in XANES, particularly in cases with a short core-hole lifetime as in deep core levels in heavy elements. However, the path expansion is not always reliable near the edge, as discussed in Sect. 2.2. Due to the large dimension of G LR, L 0 R 0 E ð Þ, exact calculations with the path expansion can only be carried out for very few low-order MS paths [18]. To overcome this computational bottleneck, an efficient approximation was devised based on the Rehr-Albers (RA) scattering matrix formalism [19]. The RA approach yields curved-wave calculations of the effective scattering amplitude f eff (from which the FEFF code takes its name) in terms of a separable representation of the free propagator G 0 E ð Þ. With this representation the MS expansion can be re-expressed as a sum over MS paths R in a form essentially the same as the original EXAFS equation of Sayers, Stern, and Lytle [12], but with renormalized ingredients in all terms.

Mean Free Path
Two of the crucial differences between ground state electronic structure and excited states in core-level spectra are (1) the need for an energy dependent selfenergy Σ E ð Þ instead of an exchange-correlation functional like DFT, and (2) the need for a screened core-hole. The self-energy is essentially a dynamically screened Hartree-Fock exchange interaction, and is the analog of the exchange-correlation potential V xc of DFT. The real part of the self-energy varies by about 10 eV over XAS energies, slowly turning off in the classical limit, while the imaginary part is negative and varies by about 5 eV. The imaginary part accounts for (extrinsic) inelastic losses or final-state broadening, and can be expressed in terms of a mean free path and a core-hole lifetime Γ, λ ¼ k= Im Σ j jþ Γ ½ : ð2:11Þ
The real part of Σ E ð Þ accounts for systematic shifts in peak positions compared to those calculated with DFT, leading to a stretching of the energy scale at low energies of about 10 %. One of the key developments in practical XAS codes is an efficient algorithm for calculations of Σ E ð Þ based on the GW approximation of Hedin [20]. For example, FEFF and several other XAS codes by default typically use a local density approximation for Σ E ð Þ based on the plasmon-pole dielectric constant. This approximation works well for EXAFS, and reduces to the ground state exchange-correlation potential near threshold. However, the plasmon-pole self-energy tends to overestimate losses in the XANES. This deficiency can be overcome by using a many-pole model, as discussed by Kas et al. [21] (see also Sect. 2.2).

Many-Body Amplitude Reduction Factor S 2 0
The effect of the convolution in the exact expression for the XAS in Eq. (2.3) is to average the one-electron XAS over the spectral function, so
Since the atomic absorption μ 0 is smoothly varying, the average μ 0 h i % μ 0 has little effect. Here χ R $ Im exp 2ikr ð Þ ½ is the XAFS contribution for a given path. Then, averaging χ R over the quasi-particle peak gives rise to a damping factor exp À2R=λ k ð Þfrom the mean free path, while the broad structure in the spectral function gives an additional factor denoted by S 2 0 , which turns out to be only weakly dependent on R. Physically the mean free path term is dominated by the extrinsic losses, while S 2 0 is dominated by intrinsic losses. A more detailed analysis shows that this factorization is most appropriate at high energies in the EXAFS regime. Near the edge, one expects interference terms to suppress these effects and hence the energy dependence of these contributions to be important.

Thermal Vibrations and XAFS Debye-Waller Factors
The effects of thermal and structural disorder lead to strong exponential damping of the fine structure, and thus are of crucial importance in XAFS. This damping is dominated by an XAFS Debye-Waller factor exp À2σ 2 k 2 À Á , where σ 2 is the mean square relative displacement (MSRD) of the near-neighbor bonds, and typically varies inversely with the local bond strength. Higher moments of the pair distribution function are sometimes important, especially in temperature dependent investigations of XAS. One of the key theoretical developments in the theory of vibrational damping in XAFS is the cumulant expansion, which yields an efficient parameterization of such thermal and configurational disorder [22,23] in terms of a few moments or cumulants σ (n) of the pair distribution function. Formally this expansion yields a complex Debye-Waller factor exp
which contributes both to the amplitude and phase of the XAFS.
The thermal contributions to σ 2 often can be fit to a correlated Debye model [24]. The corrections to the dominant second cumulant depend on anharmonicity. The first cumulant σ (1) is the net thermal expansion, while the third σ (3) characterizes the asymmetry or skew of the pair distribution function. These odd order contributions can strongly affect the phase of the fine structure, especially at high energy, giving a contribution 2kσ
Relations between the cumulants have been derived [25] which show, to leading order in the anharmonicity parameter, that σ 1 ð Þ / σ 2 T ð Þ and σ (3) is related to σ 2 (T). The third cumulant is important in bond distance determinations and in interpretations of thermal expansion. If the third cumulant is neglected in the analysis, bond distances obtained from EXAFS typically appear unphysically short. Improved treatments of XAFS Debye-Waller factors have recently been developed which go beyond the correlated Debye approximation. They are described in more detail in Sect. 2.4.

Theory of XANES

Basic Interpretation of XANES
As discussed in the previous section, the formal theories of XANES and EXAFS are essentially the same, and are both given by Fermi's golden rule, i.e., μ ω ð Þ $ X
, where j0i and jFi are many-body initial and final electronic states. When an effective single-particle description of the spectrum is reasonable, this leads to
where ii denotes the core orbital in question, f i are unoccupied single-particle states, and d ¼ Ẽ Á r is the dipole operator. The basic interpretation of this equation is that the core-level electron is kicked out of the core-level by the photon (dipole transition operator) and into an unoccupied excited state of energy ε f ¼ ε c þ ω; as required by energy conservation. The deep core electrons are very nearly angular momentum eigenstates, e.g., the K-edge is a transition from a 1s orbital. This fact, coupled with the dipole selection rule l ! l AE 1; provides an interpretation of the spectrum in terms of the angular momentum projected density of states (LDOS) and smoothly varying transition matrix elements. For example, transitions from a 1s core-level are related to the p-DOS of the system, while transitions from a 2p corelevel are related to the s-DOS and the d-DOS. In many cases the latter dominates and the spectrum can be interpreted in terms of the d-DOS alone. Although the dipole approximation is usually very good, there are some systems for which the pre-edge peaks are due to quadrupole transitions. In this case the selection rules are Δl ¼ 0, AE 2; e.g., transitions from the 1s state are related to the s-and d-DOS.

Differences Between XANES and EXAFS
Several of the approximations appropriate for the EXAFS regime (beyond about ~20-30 eV above the edge) are not valid in the near edge regime, with some of these related to the reduction of the many-body formulation to an effective singleparticle description, as in Eq. (2.13). For example, in highly correlated systems such as transition metal oxides and f-electron systems, many-body effects can change the qualitative behavior of the near edge spectrum [26], while the main effect on the EXAFS region is simply an overall reduction in the amplitude of the fine structure, which is taken into account by the S2 0 factor in the EXAFS equation, Eq. (2.2). Even in simpler systems, the approximations made to construct an effective singleparticle Hamiltonian, i.e., quasiparticle self-energy models such as the plasmon pole model, are most appropriate in the EXAFS regime. When calculating XANES they must be augmented, e.g., with the many-pole self-energy model [21]. Another approximation has to do with the description of vibrational and structural distortions. In particular, vibrational effects damp the EXAFS via the Debye-Waller factor expðÀ2k 2 σ 2 Þ. In the XANES, the effects of vibrations and disorder are sometimes more related to symmetry breaking, which allows transitions to states that were previously dipole forbidden, resulting in additional peaks in the near edge spectrum.
EXAFS is also less sensitive to the non-spherical details of the potentials, and a simple overlapped atomic muffin tin potential is adequate for most practical calculations. On the other hand, near-edge spectra can be quite sensitive to details of charge transfer and changes in Fermi level due to solid state effects. Thus the use of self-consistent potentials and often non-spherical symmetry are essential for accurate calculations of XANES. Finally, calculations of the single particle Fermi golden rule must be treated differently in the near edge region because the path expansion detailed in Eq. (2.10) often fails to converge (or converges very slowly) for low energy photoelectrons. This slow convergence is caused by two factors. First, the inelastic mean free path becomes large for low energy electrons so that very long paths must be included in the expansion. Second, large angle scattering amplitudes are not small at low energies, so that the XANES signal is not dominated by nearly linear scattering paths, and all multiple scattering paths must be taken into account.

Full Multiple Scattering
Although the path expansion method of calculation is not appropriate for the XANES, one can instead sum the expansion to all orders for any finite cluster of atoms via matrix inversion, so that instead of Eq. (2.10) we have
The matrices in this equation are represented in a site and angular momentum basis jL, Ri, so the rank of the matrix to be inverted is
where N is the number of atoms in the cluster, and l is the maximum angular momentum of an expansion in spherical harmonics. Matrix inversion can be expensive computationally for large matrices, since the time to invert scales like the cube of the rank of the matrix. Therefore, practical calculations must limit the cluster size and truncate the sum over angular momentum states. The cluster size cannot be too large, typically ~1000 atoms or less for most computations. Fortunately, one does not usually need such large clusters for XANES calculations since the finite core-hole lifetime keeps the inelastic mean free path from becoming too large. In addition, reasonable accuracy requires that l max is of order k max R mt þ l occ ; where l occ is the largest angular momentum of the occupied states and k 2  max $ E max in Rydberg units. Thus, in the XANES region one can safely set the maximum angular momentum to 4 at most, while at higher energies in the EXAFS matrix inversion becomes impractical. In the intermediate energy regime, Lanczos techniques can be used. In addition, the Green's function G(E) is parameterized by the energy of the photoelectron, thus one inversion must be performed for each energy point in the spectrum. This makes the calculations parallelize naturally and can be done very efficiently on parallel computers [27].

Self-Consistent Potentials
The Green's function can also be used to calculate the total electron density, i.e.,
Thus the Green's function naturally replaces all the orbitals used in standard density functional theory codes, and the Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian can be solved selfconsistently using the Green's function [1]. In the real-space multiple scattering code FEFF, this works as follows:
1. Atomic Dirac-Fock eigenfunctions and densities are calculated for each type of atom, and an overlapped atom approximation to the density is used as the initial guess in the self-consistency loop. 2. The density and exchange correlation functional is used to create a Kohn-Sham (LDA) potential. 3. The spherical muffin-tin approximation is applied. 4. The Green's function is calculated at each energy using a scattering state basis. 5. A new chemical potential μ is found by requiring that the total number of electrons N e , is conserved, i.e., N e ¼ À 1
6. New densities are calculated from the new Green's function and chemical potential. 7. Steps 2-6 are repeated until the output density is sufficiently close to the input density.
Figure 2.1 shows the structure of the FEFF program, along with details of the self-consistency algorithm. Several other approximations made in FEFF are worth mentioning. First, FEFF allows the user to treat several atoms as identical, even if they are physically different, i.e., two oxygen atoms in different local environments can be constrained to have the same potentials. Second, the integral over space shown in step 5 above is approximated by a sum of integrals about each atom. Each of these integrals spans the volume of a sphere (the Norman sphere) defined such that the total overlapped atomic charge (including the nucleus) is zero.
Self-consistency of the densities and potentials can be very important for XANES calculations. For example, if an initial guess of the Fermi energy is too high, pre-edge peaks are missing. Self-consistency and the shift in the Fermi energy due to solid state effects also play a role in chemical shifts, and are very important in systems with multiple, physically unique absorbing sites, such as nanoparticles on a support.
where G is the electron Green's function and W ¼ E À1 v, is the screened Coulomb interaction. In the interest of retaining the efficiency of the plasmon pole model, we have developed a many-pole model self-energy which uses multiple poles to represent the loss function L q; ω ð Þ ¼ ÀIm E À1 q, ωÞ ð ½ [21], i.e.,
The dispersion of the excitations is approximated by
4 which retains the high momentum transfer limit [29]. The amplitudes g i are fixed by matching to the loss function in the zero momentum transfer limit (q ! 0), giving
In this way the model is consistent with the inverse and first moments of the spectrum for any number of poles, and thus convergence with number of poles is relatively fast. Given this model of the dielectric function, the total self-energy can be expressed as a sum of single plasmon pole self-energies arising from interactions with "plasmons" at different frequencies, i.e.,
This model has been shown to produce reasonably accurate quasiparticle self-energies in comparison with more accurate, but much more time consuming calculations. The many pole model self-energy has been applied to a variety of systems and gives improved results for amplitudes and phases in XANES calculations using FEFF. The model can also be applied in a post processing step as a convolution of the spectrum with an energy dependent Lorentzian [31], as seen in Fig. 2.2, which shows a comparison of theoretical and experimental results for the Li K-edge XANES of LiF [4].
In addition to quasiparticle energies, we can also calculate the inelastic mean free path (IMFP) [34], which is related to the imaginary part of the self-energy, i.e., 2.3 shows a comparison between calculated and experimental IMFP values for Cu, along with results from the plasmon pole model. These results show clear improvement in the agreement with experiment over the plasmon pole model, which is clearly inaccurate below $ 100 eV.
Multi-electron excitations can also be calculated given the quasiparticle selfenergy, via a convolution of the spectrum with an effective spectral function as in Eq. (2.3) [13,21]. These calculations are based on a quasi-boson model, which also gives an estimate of the amplitude reduction factor S 2 0 . In addition, the calculations yield the satellites on the spectrum which roughly show up as "replica" peaks in the spectrum, shifted by the energy of the main bosonic excitations of the system, and are reflected by peaks in the observed loss function.  [32], the OCEAN BSE code (red), OCEAN plus the self-energy convolution (green dashed), and experiment (blue dashed) [33]. Figure taken from Ref. [4] Fig. 2.3 Inelastic mean free path of Cu calculated using a single plasmon pole (green dashes), the many pole model (solid red), and a semi-empirical model (pink dots), compared to experimental data from (a) Ref. [35] (blue squares) and (b) Ref. [36] (black circles)

Information in XANES: Atomic and Electronic Structure
XANES can be used to probe a variety of properties, including local electronic and chemical structure, atomic structure, and sometimes vibrational properties. For example, L 2,3 -edges of transition metals can be related to the number of holes in the d-orbitals [37]. Shifts in the onset of the spectrum can also indicate charge transfer to and from a metallic particle, or changes in formal oxidation state. While EXAFS is extremely sensitive to the first shell distances and, to a lesser extent, to coordination numbers, XANES is complementary in the sense that it is more sensitive to the local symmetry around the absorbing atom [38]. For example, the spectrum of an atom with four nearest neighbors in tetrahedral symmetry changes appreciably when the symmetry is changed to square planar. Another effect of local symmetry is symmetry breaking due to vibrational effects [39]. An example of symmetry breaking is shown in Fig. 2.4, which displays the Ti K-edge spectrum of PbTiO 3 with and without distortions that break centro-symmetric symmetry.

Use of Configurational Averaging for Vibrational and Static Disorder
For complicated systems such as amorphous materials or systems at higher temperatures, the EXAFS can be calculated via Debye-Waller factors which damp each path at high k. The XANES is more difficult, since changes in symmetry can Fig. 2.4 Ti K-edge XANES of PbTiO 3 calculated using a distorted crystal structure (solid red), the same but with the basis limited to s-and p-states (thin blue dots), and using the ideal centrosymmetric crystal structure (green dashes), compared to experimental results (black circles)
allow previously forbidden transitions, resulting in new peaks in the spectrum. Thus a more accurate method for calculating XANES is to perform averaging over physically unique absorbing sites. This configurational averaging must be performed even when disorder is not present if the system in question has more than one physically unique absorber. For example, magnetite has both tetrahedrally and octahedrally coordinated iron atoms, thus one calculation should be performed for each of these sites, and the final signal obtained from weighted average of the calculated results, where the weighting depends on the site stoichiometry. Doped systems can also require this kind of configurational averaging if the doping concentration is high. Also, in nanoparticles there can be a large number of physically unique sites, based on the proximity to the surface of the particle, interaction with the support, and interaction with adsorbed molecules. All of these effects cause distortions, which ideally should be modeled along with the dynamic, temperature dependent effects. This can be done using, for example, ab initio molecular dynamics to obtain snapshots of the structure of the system [40][41][42]. The XANES can be calculated for each snapshot by averaging over unique sites, and an average over snapshots gives the final result. There are several approximation applied in the FEFF code that can affect the outcome of such calculations. First, core level shifts due to charge transfer can be important in the final averaged result, since these cause red or blue shifting of the absorption edge. Second, the chemical potential found by FEFF must be calculated carefully since this also causes shifting of the edge. For example, all calculations performed on a static nanoparticle should result in the same (or very nearly the same) chemical potential. This sometimes requires that a unique potential be defined for each type of atom, although atoms with similar chemical surroundings can in many cases be defined as the same type without much loss of accuracy in the results.
2.2.8 Other Spectroscopies: EELS, XES, NRIXS, RIXS, Compton, etc.
Many other spectroscopies are related to XAS as they involve similar physics and an analogous golden rule formalism. In particular, electron energy loss (EELS), X-ray emission (XES), and non-resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (NRIXS) are all similar to XAS, the main difference being that they probe different states, either because the transition operator is different, as in EELS and NRIXS, or because the initial and final states are different, as in XES. XES is particularly useful since it probes the occupied states of the system via the dipole operator, and is thus complementary to XAS [43]. EELS and NRIXS both obey a Fermi's golden rule with transition operators e iqÁr replacing the dipole operator, where q is the momentum transfer due to the scattering of the electron or photon [7,44]. This momentum transfer can be controlled by adjusting the angle of detection, and thus the dipole limit can be reached in which case the signal is equivalent to XAS, with b q replacing the polarization direction. The EELS amplitude contains a factor that damps the high momentum transfer signal, so that it is usually within the dipole limit, while NRIXS does not contain this factor, making it possible to probe the local unoccupied density of states for all angular momenta [45]. In addition, NRIXS is useful as a bulk probe of low energy edges, since the energy loss is required to match the edge energy, and high energy X-rays can still be used as the probe [46]. Resonant X-ray emission (RXES) is given by the Kramers-Heisenberg formula, which is similar to Fermi's golden rule, but includes a resonant energy denominator that focuses on a given transition. Although the formula is more complicated than XAS, the RXES spectrum can be approximated by the convolution of an effective XAS signal with the XES spectrum [47], i.e.,
where μ XES is the XES spectrum, μ is the effective XAS spectrum, and E b and Γ b are the core level energy and broadening corresponding to the initial (deep core) excitation, respectively. This formula can be used to estimate both core to core resonant inelastic X-ray scattering, core-valence RXES, and high energy resolution fluorescence detection (HERFD) XAS. Finally, Compton scattering can be calculated within the impulse approximation from the density matrix, ρ r; r 0 ð Þ¼À1=π
, making multiple scattering a natural formalism for these calculations [48].

Analysis of EXAFS and XANES
The analysis of EXAFS and XANES begins with a good quality experimental spectrum, and at least some understanding of the physical and chemical environment of the sample that gave that spectrum. Because EXAFS can be measured in a number of modes, and over a wide range of sample conditions and concentration of the absorbing element, care must be taken to ensure that the spectrum being analyzed has been corrected for systematic measurement errors such as overabsorption effects [49,50] and detector saturation [51]. These topics are beyond the scope of the present chapter, but must be considered in order to get meaningful results from EXAFS and XANES analysis. Here, a good measurement of μ(E) is simply assumed. The key steps for reducing μ(E) to "the EXAFS" χ(k) are shown, the EXAFS Fourier transform presented, and the analysis of the EXAFS equation, Eq. (2.2), to extract coordination numbers, distances, and atomic species of the near-neighbors of the absorbing element is discussed. Finally, a simple approach to analysis of experimental XANES spectra in terms of linear components of model spectra is outlined. Many treatments [52][53][54][55][56] give more complete and detailed discussions of EXAFS and XANES analysis.

Data Reduction
For all XAFS data, whether measured in transmission or emission mode, the data reduction and analysis are essentially the same. First, the measured intensity signals are converted to μ(E), normalized to unity edge jump, and then reduced to χ(k). Normalized μ(E) is suitable for XANES analysis, while EXAFS modeling using the EXAFS equation requires background-subtracted χ(k). In this section, we go through these steps of data reduction in some detail.
For transmission measurements, the Beer-Lambert law
ð2:19Þ can be used to convert measured intensities to a quantity proportional to the absorption coefficient, μ(E). Here I 0 is the X-ray intensity incident on a sample, I is the X-ray intensity transmitted through the sample, and t is the sample thickness. This can be rearranged (and t ignored as a constant) to give
Usually neither I 0 nor I is an absolute intensity by itself, but signals from ion chambers, photodiodes, or other detectors that are proportional to these intensities. Thus, it is customary to see experimental values reported for "raw" μ(E) in the literature that do not have dimensions of inverse length, but rather are proportional to μ(E) in inverse length. Since the μ(E) will be re-scaled early in the data reduction, this not a problem. For measurements made by detecting emission of the excited atom (including X-ray fluorescence, Auger, and optical luminescence), μ(E) is given as
where I f is the emitted signal of interest. As with transmission measurements, there is no need to worry about getting absolute intensities, and one can use the ratio of measured intensities.

Pre-edge Subtraction and Normalization
The experimental μ(E) is reduced to a normalized μ(E), representing the absorption of one X-ray by the element and absorption edge of interest, for both XANES and EXAFS analysis. The resulting normalized μ(E) will have a value near 0 below the edge and be approximately 1 well above the edge. The first step in this process is to identify the edge or threshold energy, E 0 . Since chemical differences can easily move the threshold by several eV, and because calibrations vary between monochromators and beamlines by similar amounts, the most important feature of the E 0 identified at this point is consistency. Though a crude approximation with little theoretical justification, the most common approach is to take the maximum of the first derivative of μ(E). This is easily reproduced, and readily applied to any spectrum, but may require refinement during fitting of the EXAFS. Instrumental drifts from detectors and the expected E À3 dependence of μ(E) can be approximated by a polynomial dependence of μ(E). As a first approximation, a simple linear fit to the pre-edge range of the spectrum can be extrapolated and subtracted from the full spectrum. A slightly better approximation is to fit to the so-called Victoreen pre-edge function, E n μ(E), where n is typically 1, 2 or 3. This is especially helpful for data measured in fluorescence with a solid-state detector for dilute species, where elastic and Compton-scattered X-ray intensity can leak into the energy window of the fluorescence peak of interest, and where this leakage decays as the incident energy increases.
Finally, the edge step Δμ is found, and the pre-edge subtracted μ(E) is divided by this value. Typically, a low-order polynomial is fit to μ(E) well above the edge (so as to avoid the XANES region), and the value of this polynomial is extrapolated to E 0 to give the edge step. It should be emphasized that this convention is fairly crude and can introduce systematic biases in the result for Δμ.
These steps are illustrated in Fig. 2.5 for transmission XAFS data at the Fe K-edge of FeO. For XANES analysis, this amount of data reduction is generally sufficient. For both XANES and EXAFS analysis, the most important part of these steps is the normalization to the edge step. For XANES analysis, spectra are generally compared by amplitude, so an error in the edge step for any spectrum will directly affect the weight given to it. For EXAFS, the edge step is used to scale χ(k), and so is directly proportional to coordination number. Good normalization (such that μ(E) goes to 1 above the edge) is generally not hard, but requires some care, and it is important to assess how well and how consistently this normalization process actually works for a particular data set. Most analysis packages do these steps reasonably well, especially in making spectral normalization consistent for similar datasets, but it is not unusual for such automated estimates of the edge step to need an adjustment of 10 %.

Background Subtraction
In order to model the EXAFS with equation Eq. (2.2), the EXAFS χ(k) must be separated from the absorption coefficient, using
Here, μ 0 (E) represents the absorption coefficient of the absorbing atom without photoelectron scattering from the neighboring atoms, and Δμ 0 is the edge step. Since μ 0 (E) cannot be measured readily (if at all), it is approximated mathematically. Usually a piece-wise polynomial or spline is used for μ 0 (E). While an ad hoc approach, and capable of being abused, this can be made robust with a small amount of care. The main challenge is to decide how flexible the spline should be, so as to ensure that it does not follow μ(E) closely enough to remove the EXAFS. That is, μ 0 (E) should follow the slowly varying parts of μ(E) but not χ(E), which varies more quickly with E.
A simple approach that works well for most cases relies on the Fourier transform to mathematically express this idea that μ 0 (E) should match the slowly varying parts of μ(E) but not the quickly varying parts of μ(E). The Fourier transform is critical to EXAFS analysis, and will be discussed in more detail shortly, but for now the most important point is that it gives a weight for each frequency making up a waveform. The EXAFS Fourier transform converts χ from wavenumber k to distance R.
For determining the background μ 0 (E), the spline function should remove the low-R components of χ, while retaining the high-R components. Conveniently, distinguishing "low-R" from "high-R" can be made physically meaningful using the approximate distance to the nearest neighboring atom. As a realistic rule of thumb, Fig. 2.5 Left: The XANES portion of the XAFS spectrum (blue), and the identification of E 0 from the maximum of the derivative dμ/dE (black). Right: XAFS pre-edge subtraction and normalization. A line or low-order polynomial is fit to the spectrum below the edge, and a separate low-order polynomial is fit to the spectrum well above the edge. The edge jump Δμ 0 is taken as the difference between these two curves at E 0 . Subtracting the pre-edge polynomial from the full spectrum and dividing by the edge jump gives the normalized XAFS atoms are rarely closer together than about 1.5 Å-this is especially true for the heavier elements to which EXAFS is usually applied. Thus, a spline can be used for μ 0 (E) that makes the resulting χ have as little weight as possible below some distance R bkg (typically, 1 Å), while ignoring the higher R components of χ. While this approach [57] is not always perfect, it can be applied easily to any spectrum and has some physically meaningful basis. Figure 2.6 shows a typical background spline found for FeO, using a R bkg of 1.0 Å, and the resulting χ(k).

EXAFS Fourier Transforms
The Fourier transform is central to the understanding and modeling of EXAFS data. While many resources describe Fourier transforms and their properties, a few important points about the use of Fourier transforms for EXAFS are made here. Figure 2.7 illustrates the EXAFS Fourier transform for the Fe K-edge data of FeO shown in Fig. 2.6. Two peaks are clearly visible below 3 Å, corresponding to the Fe-O and Fe-Fe distances in the rock-salt structure of FeO. Thus the Fourier transformed EXAFS separates different coordination spheres around the absorbing atom.
In Fig. 2.7, jχ(R)j almost looks like a radial distribution function, g(R). While EXAFS does depend on the partial pair distribution-the probability of finding an atom at a distance R from an atom of the absorbing species-it must be emphasized that jχ(R)j is not a pair distribution function. This can be seen from the additional parts to the EXAFS equation, including the non-smooth k dependence of the scattering factor f eff (k) and phase-shift Φ(k). An important feature of χ(R) is that the positions of the peaks are shifted to lower R from the interatomic distances of g(R). For FeO, the first main peak occurs at 1.6 Å, while the FeO distance in FeO is ~2.1 Å. This is not an error, but is due to the scattering phase-shift-recall that the EXAFS goes as
. For most systems involving single-scattering, Φ k ð Þ $ Àk is a Fig. 2.6 Left: Background subtraction for Fe K-edge EXAFS of FeO. A smooth spline function (black) that matches the low-R components of μ(E) (blue), in this case using 1 Å for R bkg , is used to approximate μ 0 (E). Right: the EXAFS χ(k) (black) isolated after background subtraction. The EXAFS decays quickly with k, and weighting by k 2 (blue) amplifies the oscillations at high k decent if crude approximation to the phase-shift, which gives a shift to the peaks in χ(R) of À0.5 Å or so relative to the actual interatomic distances. The Fourier transform is inherently complex, and gives a complex function for χ(R) even though χ(k) is a strictly real function. It is common to display only the magnitude of χ(R) as shown in solid in Fig. 2.7, but the real (blue) and imaginary components contain important information that cannot be ignored when modeling EXAFS. In contrast to the standard form, the Fourier transform for EXAFS analysis uses conjugate variables of k and 2R, reflecting the EXAFS equation. For numerical analysis, a discrete Fast Fourier transform is used. The data must be interpolated onto a uniformly spaced set of values in k. Typically, a spacing of δk ¼ 0:05 Å À1 and an array size of N ¼ 2048 k values are used. This gives a spacing of R points in the discrete χ(R) of δR % 0:0307 Å.
Prior to the transform, χ(k) is usually multiplied by a power of k, typically k 2 or k 3 , as shown in Fig. 2.6. This weighting helps compensate for the strong decay with k of χ(k). In addition, χ(k) is multiplied by a window function Ω(k) which smooths the resulting χ(R) and removes ripples and ringing that would result from a sudden truncation of χ(k) at the ends of the data range. Since Fourier transforms are used in many fields, there is an extensive literature on such window functions and many choices available in most EXAFS analysis packages.
In many analyses, the inverse Fourier transform is used to select a particular R range and transform this back to k space, filtering out most of the spectrum and leaving only a narrow band of R values in the resulting filtered χ(k). This can isolate the EXAFS signal for a single shell of physical atoms around the absorbing atom, and was the basis of most early EXAFS analyses. This approach should be used with caution since, for all but the simplest of systems, it can be surprisingly difficult to effectively isolate the EXAFS contribution from an individual scattering atom Fig. 2. 7 The XAFS Fourier Transform, χ(R). The magnitude jχ(R)j (black) is the most common way to view the data, showing peaks corresponding to scattering from neighboring atoms. The Fourier transform χ(R) is a complex function, with both a real (blue) and imaginary parts this way. It is almost never possible to isolate a second neighbor coordination sphere in this way. For this reason, many modern analyses of EXAFS will use a Fourier transform to convert χ(k) to χ(R), and use χ(R) for data modeling, without trying to isolate shells of atoms.

XAFS Data Modeling
The FeO data shown above is convenient to illustrate many aspects of EXAFS data modeling. FeO has a simple rock salt structure, with Fe surrounded by 6 O, with octahedral symmetry, and then 12 Fe atoms in the next shell. Starting with this simple structure, the scattering amplitudes f eff (k) and phase-shifts Φ(k) can be calculated theoretically using the FEFF formalism described above. These theoretical scattering factors (along with a calculation of the mean free path λ k ) can be used in the EXAFS equation to refine structural parameters R, N, and σ 2 to match a set of data. Typically, E 0 (the energy for which k ¼ 0) is also adjusted to best match data, to compensate for the crude estimate made in the initial processing. While one can do the refinement with the measured χ(k), working with the complex χ(R) is generally preferred, as higher coordination shells can be selectively ignored. The examples shown here are done with the FEFF6 [2,58] program to construct the theoretical factors, and the IFEFFIT [59][60][61] package to do the analysis. Some aspects of the analysis shown here may depend on details of these particular programs, but similar results can be obtained with any of several EXAFS analysis programs.

Running and Using FEFF for EXAFS Calculations
In order to calculate the f eff (k) and Φ(k) needed for the analysis, the FEFF program [58] uses a cluster of atoms, builds atomic potentials from this, and simulates a photoelectron with a particular energy being emitted by a particular absorbing atom and propagating along a set of scattering paths [62]. As detailed above, FEFF includes many subtle but quantitatively important effects. Because one starts with a cluster that represents the atomic structure, the FEFF fitting process is a refinement of the path lengths and coordination numbers for those paths. Conveniently, FEFF breaks up the results in a way that can be put into the standard form of the EXAFS equation, even for multiple-scattering paths. This allows analysis procedures to easily refine distances, apply multiplicative factors for coordination numbers and S 2 0 , and apply disorder terms. Because the outputs have a uniform format, results from different runs of the programs can readily be mixed, which is important for modeling complex structures with multiple coordination environments for the absorbing atom.

First-Shell Fitting
To model the first shell EXAFS of FeO, a simulation of the EXAFS for the Fe-O scattering path is calculated by FEFF from a cluster derived from the known crystal parameters for FeO. Setting S 2 0 to 0.75, values for N, R, σ 2 , and E 0 are refined until the model for χ best matches the complex χ(R) of the measured data. The results of this refinement are shown in Fig. 2.8, with best-fit values and estimated uncertainties for the refined parameters given in Table 2.1. These values are not perfect for crystalline FeO, especially in that the distance is contracted from the expected value of 2.14 Å, but they are reasonably close for a first analysis.
It is instructive to look at this refinement more closely and discuss a few details. The refinement was done on the χ(R) data, after a Fourier transform of k 2 χ(k)Ω(k) for both data and model, where Ω(k) represents a Hanning window with a range between k ¼ 2:5, 13:5 ½ Å À1 , and with a dk parameter of 2 Å À1 . Both real and imaginary components of χ(R) between R ¼ 1:0, 2:0 ½ Å were used. Figure 2.8 shows that the higher frequency components from the second shell of Fe-Fe dominate k 2 χ(k). This is a useful reminder of the power of the Fourier transform in XAFS analysis: it allows one to ignore shells of higher frequency even if they have larger overall amplitude.
The refinement used a nonlinear least-squares fit to minimize a standard statistical definition for the chi-square statistic where y data i is the experimental data, y model i (x) is the model constructed from the EXAFS equation and the variable fitting parameters x, ε is uncertainty in the data, and N data is the number of points being fit. As mentioned above, the real and imaginary components of χ(R) were used as y for both data and model, though fitting to k 2 χ(k) data is not uncommon. A crude estimate of ε can be made from the high frequency noise in χ(k) [63]. Historically, the problem of identifying N data has been controversial. For any signal, the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem gives the resolution R (the smallest detectable difference in distances) based on k max , the maximum measured value of k, as δR ¼ π=2k max . From this, it follows [64,65] that the maximum number of independent measurements that can be extracted from an EXAFS spectrum is
where Δk and ΔR are the range of useful data in k and R. For the first shell of FeO with k ¼ 2:5; 13:5 ½ Å À1 and R ¼ 1:0; 2:0 ½ Å, this gives N ind % 8. The number of variables in a fit should not exceed this value.

Second-Shell Fitting
Including the second shell in the model for the FeO EXAFS involves adding the path for Fe-Fe scattering to the sum in the EXAFS equation. Variables for R, N, and σ 2 for the Fe-Fe shell will be included, while a single value for E 0 will be used for both the Fe-O and Fe-Fe paths. The fit range will be extended to R ¼ 1:0, 3:1 ½ Å, increasing N ind to % 15:7, while the number of variables increases to 7. Results for this fit are shown Fig. 2.9 and Table 2.2. The structural values for distances and coordination number are consistent with the known crystal structure of FeO, though the Fe-O distance is a bit shorter than expected, and the Fe-Fe is a bit longer than expected, both suggesting that there may be some contamination of a ferric iron phase in the sample. Figure 2.9 shows the fit to be quite good, especially in the real part of χ(R), which is actually used in the fit. Figure 2.10 shows the individual contributions to the total best-fit spectrum. In k-space, the contribution from Fe-Fe is seen to have a shorter period than Fe-O due the longer interatomic distance. In addition, the Fe-Fe contribution persists to higher k due to the dependence of f eff (k) on Z of the scatterer. In R-space, substantial overlap can be seen between the two shells, even though there is a strong dip in jχ(R)j at 2 Å. Indeed, the inclusion of the Fe-Fe shell did subtly alter the best-fit results (though within the estimated uncertainty) for the Fe-O shell.

XANES Analysis
As discussed in Sect. 2.2.6, XANES is uniquely sensitive to oxidation state, coordination chemistry, and the partial density of unoccupied electronic states, and XANES spectra are much richer in spectral features than EXAFS, making it an excellent spectroscopic technique for almost every element [66]. Unfortunately, the EXAFS equation breaks down at low k, where λ k diverges, so that a huge number of scattering paths contribute. With no readily parameterized XANES equation, quantitative XANES analysis has traditionally relied on fitting idealized peak-shapes to spectral features or matching spectra to linear combinations of spectra from known systems. These approaches are reasonably well justified in many specific cases, but are not easy to generalize. Some work [67,68] has been done to try adapt a suite of calculations to best-match experimental data using a reverse Monte-Carlo approach, which has the advantage of being able to use both the XANES and EXAFS portions of a spectrum, but is computationally slow. In the soft X-ray regime, and for certain 3d metal pre-edge peaks, quantitative analysis based on multiplet analysis is also robust and very useful for assigning electronic transitions [69].
Although the XANES cannot be numerically parameterized in terms of oxidation state or coordination chemistry, these can be determined using simpler spectroscopic analysis methods. For example, the pre-edge peaks in the K and L edges of 3d metal are very rich at identifying coordination chemistry and hybridization of electronic levels, even if the precise intensities of the different transitions is complicated to calculate accurately. To make analysis quantitative, fitted intensities of such peaks can be compared to calibration curves made from spectra of known materials. While such analysis is not ab initio, it can be robust and reliable with minimal effort. As an illustration of such XANES peak analysis, the left-hand side of Fig. 2.11 shows the pre-edge peaks of Fe 2 O 3, and a fit to this edge structure using several peaks-in this case 3 separate Voigt functions and one error function. These peaks can be assigned as the atomic-like multiplet orbitals, and the 1s-4p transition. When applied over a range of experimental compounds, clear trends emerge and the XANES peak intensities can give excellent precision in oxidation state [70][71][72].
A second common approach to XANES analysis is to treat the spectra as a signature or fingerprint of a material, and determine the fractional composition of ½ eV. The fit used three Voigt peaks (blue, solid) and an error function (blue, dashed). The fit residual (black), has been multiplied by 10, and offset. Right: XANES fit of an unknown Au LIII-edge spectrum to a linear combination of spectra from model compounds (gold chloride, metal, and sulfide), with contributions of individual components (blue) and the fit residual. After Lengke et al. [76] spectra from well-characterized materials. This approach uses simple linear statistical analysis, and so can build on a wide literature, including Principal Component Analysis [73] and related methods [74,75]. As an illustration, the L III -edge XANES spectrum of an experimental gold compound [76] is shown on the right-hand side of Fig. 2.11, along with the weighted components used to fit the spectrum. This approach relies heavily on the use of the correct components, and care must be taken to ensure that standard spectra are correctly calibrated in energy and normalized in intensity.

Theoretical Modeling of EXAFS and XANES

Introduction
The great success of EXAFS and XANES stems from the insights they provide into the atomic and electronic structure of complex materials. This has been especially important for catalytic systems, as discussed elsewhere in this volume. As shown in the previous sections, this success was aided in part by the development of robust theoretical methods to simulate a broad range of X-ray spectroscopies [1,2,19]. Although these methods have often been highly successful, a limitation is that the accuracy of the predicted spectra depends on the quality of the structural models used in the simulations. This is particularly important in XANES simulations. In the past, this drawback has been sidestepped by either the use of known crystallographic information, or by a combination of EXAFS modeling and chemical know-how of the nature of the material in order to build more complete structural models [77]. In recent decades, however, materials research has begun to focus on complex materials under operando or extreme conditions. Typical examples of these types of systems are supported nanocatalysts [40,42,78], solvated ions [41], and shocked materials. Reliable simulations under those conditions require more sophisticated models that capture the heterogeneous nature of the materials. Thus, the field of XAS modeling has recently progressed towards the interfacing of spectroscopy codes with existing software for calculations of structural and electronic properties [6]. In the following sections we present a few examples that highlight the power of this blend of spectroscopy, materials science, condensed matter physics and quantum chemistry methods.

Use of Modeling to Enhance EXAFS Analysis
While the fitting of EXAFS spectra using theoretical scattering amplitudes and phase-shifts is now a well-established methodology, the calculation of other parameters of the EXAFS equation, Eq. (2.2), such as path lengths, number of near-neighbors N R and mean-square relative displacements (MSRD) σ 2 R have only recently become feasible on a routine basis. While many theoretical methods lack the accuracy needed to rival fitted EXAFS path lengths, they may be well suited to distinguish between alternative conformations, and provide good approximations to both the N R and σ 2 R , thus making the fitting of the path lengths much more reliable in many complicated materials. In this section we discuss two ways in which theoretical modeling can enhance EXAFS fits: First, we focus on the calculation of ab initio Debye-Waller factors for systems where σ 2 R can be described well using a combination of static and vibrational disorder. Second, we highlight the simulation of EXAFS spectra for systems with large dynamic disorder.

Ab Initio Debye-Waller Factors
The theory behind MSRDs or XAFS Debye-Waller factors and how to compute them ab initio is now fairly well established [79][80][81][82]. Briefly, the MSRD or σ 2 R for a path R is defined by the thermal average:
where R and R are the instantaneous and mean path lengths, respectively. In the quasi-harmonic approximation, the average can be computed as a sum over vibrational or phonon eigenmodes [81] or, alternatively, in terms of the projected vibrational density of states ρ R (ω) or VDOS, and the Debye integral
where μ R is the reduced mass for path R. Poiarkova and Rehr [79,80] have shown that the VDOS can be calculated efficiently from the imaginary part of the lattice dynamical Green's function matrix element:
Here j0i is a vector representing a normalized mass-weighted displacement of the atoms along the multiple-scattering path R. Efficient calculations of the lattice dynamical Green's function can be accomplished using a continued fraction representation obtained with the iterative Lanczos algorithm that yields an N-pole representation for the VDOS where ω ν and w ν are, respectively, the pole frequencies and weights of pole v. D, the dynamical matrix of force constants, or Hessian, is the main ingredient required for the calculation of theoretical MSRDs and is defined as:
∂u jlα ∂u j 0 l 0 β ; ð2:28Þ
where u jlα and M j are the α ¼ x; y; z f gCartesian displacement and mass of atom j in unit cell l, respectively, and E is the internal energy of the system. For molecular systems, D is routinely computed with quantum chemistry packages like Gaussian [83], NWChem [84], and ORCA [85], and the accuracy of different methods is well-established [86,87]. For solids, the dynamical matrix can be computed, e.g., using ABINIT [88][89][90], VASP [91], and Quantum Espresso [92]. The MSRDs can be extracted from the output of these and other programs by using interface programs included in FEFF [6] and used directly to replace the values provided by phenomenological Einstein or Debye models. A typical example of the quality of the results that can be obtained for molecular ion complexes such as the one shown in Fig. 2.12 are presented in Table 2.3. The Ru(bpy) 2 (AP)(H 2 O) þþ complex was optimized and its Hessian calculated using the B3LYP exchange correlation functional, while using the SDD effective core potential and associated basis sets for all atoms. The agreement between the experimental [93] and theoretical coordination  distances for the tightly bound N near-neighbors is good, despite being slightly outside the EXAFS error bars. For the weakly bound water molecule, the theoretical distance is slightly overestimated, but still reasonable.
The agreement for the MSRDs (σ 2 ) is quite good and, given the error margins from the EXAFS fit, could be used "as is" in the EXAFS fit to replace the fitted values. In particular, the theoretical results provide a good alternative for the weaker bonds, where the EXAFS-fitted values have large uncertainties.
In practice, however, a better approach may be to set up a fitting model where the near-neighbor MSRDs are scaled by a single parameter. This approach is quite useful for systems with mixed coordination shells with different MSRDs where the number of EXAFS parameters becomes large and highly correlated.

Simulating EXAFS of Dynamic Systems
The standard approach to vibrational disorder in EXAFS assumes that the local environment surrounding the absorbing atom is relatively rigid, with small distortions that are harmonic, thus resulting in an approximately Gaussian pair distribution function [22]. Although broadly applicable, this approach can give poor results for systems like ions in solution or liquid materials, where the bonds between the absorber and its near-neighbors are continuously breaking and reforming. In such cases using an optimized structure plus vibrations is not sufficient, and an explicit sampling over the dynamical fluctuations is needed. A method of choice to obtain this sampling is molecular dynamics (MD) in conditions of temperature, pressure, and concentration that closely resemble those used in the experiments. MD simulations rely on the calculation of atomic forces that can be computed based on either model or ab initio potential energy surfaces [94,95]. The former results in very efficient calculations, but have the drawback of requiring the parameterization of a model potential that might or might not be transferable to other systems and conditions. The latter, on the other hand, can be applied to a very broad range of conditions although at a very high computational cost. Both approaches has been applied successfully to the simulation of ions in solution [96,97]. For example, Fulton et al. [41] have demonstrated near-quantitative prediction of EXAFS spectra for charged transition metal ions in solution. Figure 2. 13 shows the module and imaginary parts of the real-space fine structure for Cr þ3 in aqueous solution, compared to theory. The theoretical results were obtained from FEFF simulations using conformations sampled from a QM/MM MD simulation. Remarkably, these simulations do not include any type of experimental parameter and the thermal broadening of the distribution arises naturally from the averaging.

Use of Modeling to Enhance XANES Analysis
The theoretical modeling of XANES spectra poses bigger challenges than that of EXAFS due to two main reasons: (a) It demands more computationally intensive simulations and, (b) generally there is incomplete information about the structure of the system under study. These two aspects result in the need for theoretical generation of structural models by means of optimizations or MD simulations. As in the case of EXAFS, the former are quite useful for quasi-rigid systems, while the latter are required for systems with dynamic fluctuations and bond-breaking. As opposed to EXAFS, XANES spectra are often less sensitive to the quality of the structural model, thus permitting the direct use of theoretical structures in the simulations. The advent of accurate and efficient DFT simulations has virtually eliminated the need to guess possible structures since one can now optimize accurate models based on simple external information such as composition  [98,99]. Moreover, one can also take advantage of other information resulting from simulations such as thermodynamic properties, charge distribution (see below), and vibrational properties (see discussion on MSRDs above). In light of the current trend towards multi-spectroscopy, operando experimental approaches [100], this broad range of theoretical properties facilitates a more holistic interpretation of the experimental results. In the following sections we focus on two aspects of theoretical modeling of XANES. First, we discuss the importance of including dynamical disorder in XANES simulations to be able to reproduce experiment. Second, we focus on the enhanced understanding that emerges from the atomistic information provided by simulations.

Effects of Dynamical Disorder on XANES
As in the case of EXAFS, dynamic structural disorder plays a very important role in the accurate simulation of XANES [40,78,100]. For systems where the experiment naturally samples a large number of conformations, the XANES simulations must usually include similar sampling to be able to reproduce experiment. The most common way to do structural sampling theoretically is by means of molecular dynamics simulations over a suitable time-frame. These simulations can rely on model potential energy surfaces, as discussed for EXAFS above, or on ab initio DFT potentials (i.e., DFT/MD). In practice, the former is quite efficient and provides a good understanding of the structural properties for systems with a mixture of covalent and soft interactions. But, for other examples of dynamic systems with metallic bonds such as supported metal clusters, the use of DFT/MD is highly recommended. This approach also has the added bonus of providing very useful information about the electronic structure of the material. A classic example of this type of problem is the case of Pt and PtSn nanoclusters on γ-Al 2 O 3 [40,42], where modeling is needed to understand their intra-particle heterogeneity and their structural and electronic changes under realistic conditions. DFT/MD simulations reveal that the nanoscale structure and charge distribution are inhomogeneous and dynamically fluctuating over several time-scales, ranging from fast (200-400 fs) bond vibrations to slow fluxional bond breaking (>10 ps). To help visualize this fluctuating behavior, Fig. 2.14 shows an average of snapshots extracted from the MD simulations at two different temperatures. At low temperature (165 K), the cluster "rocks" over the surface. While mostly maintaining its shape, it is clearly less rigid than the surface. At high temperature (the catalyst operando temperature of 573 K), however, the cluster becomes highly fluxional due to the large number of bondbreaking events and is capable of diffusing over the surface.
The effects of the dynamic disorder on the XANES are very significant. Figure 2.15 shows a comparison between the experimental XANES spectra and those obtained from MD and Boltzmann sampling of the conformations. Despite the large fluctuations indicated by the standard deviation bars, the MD-sampled spectra are in very good agreement with experiment, capturing both the enhancement of the white line at high temperatures and the red shift of the edge. In contrast, the spectra  obtained from the Boltzmann-average of quenched conformations show little difference between both temperatures, and severely overestimate the intensity of the white line. The main difference between the MD and quenched conformation samplings stems mainly from the important role played by breaking and reforming bonds.

Understanding Electronic Structure Changes Through Modeling
Perhaps one of the most useful features of theoretical modeling is the possibility of directly visualizing atomistic changes in electron density distribution. This is particularly important since global probes such as EXAFS and XANES reveal the ensemble characteristics of materials while missing details of their internal structure. Moreover, changes in spectral features such as edge position and white line intensity that are commonly associated with charge density fluctuations in a qualitative way can be studied quantitatively and in detail. An excellent example of the atomistic understanding that is gained through modeling arises again in the case of Pt 10 on γ-Al 2 O 3 [40]. Figure 2.14 shows that the cluster is roughly separated into two layers, with one layer in contact with the surface (golden spheres) and another resting on top (purple spheres). The atoms in the contact layer become positively charge or "oxidized," while the others are neutral or slightly negatively charged ("reduced"). The MD simulations show that at high temperature, the number of contacts with the surface increases, thus removing more charge from the cluster which results in the expected red shift in the absorption edge position and increase in the white line intensity. Moreover, these charge fluctuations can be correlated with other observed trends such as negative thermal expansion in Pt clusters [40], and species segregation and differential reactivity in PtSn alloy clusters [42,78]. This detailed atomistic understanding can only be achieved through the close integration of modeling and experiment. Synchrotron-Radiation Sources, X-ray Optics and Beamlines Tomoya Uruga

Synchrotron-Radiation Sources
A synchrotron radiation (SR) source is one of the best light sources for XAFS measurements, which need an intense energy-tunable X-ray source with a wide range. Two types of SR sources are available: a storage ring and a linear accelerator. Sects. 3.1-3.3 describe the storage-ring source and associated beamlines. Chapter 4 describes an X-ray free electron laser (XFEL) as an advanced linearaccelerator source.

Bending-Magnet Source
The main characteristics of SR light emitted from a storage ring are high brightness, a very wide and continuous spectral range, high directionality, variable polarity, and a pulsed time structure [1,2]. The origins of these characteristics are described in the following.
A schematic drawing of a storage ring is shown in Fig. 3.1. Electrons are accelerated up to close to the speed of light by a linear or ring accelerator and injected to the storage ring. In the storage ring, the electrons are subjected to a Lorentz force in the direction perpendicular to their direction of motion in the magnetic field of the dipole bending magnet (BM); as a result, they emit an electromagnetic wave (i.e., SR light). The electric field of the SR light from the BM observed in the horizontal plane is polarized in the plane of acceleration, i.e., the horizontal plane. The SR pattern is compressed into a narrow cone in the direction tangential to the electron orbit due to a Lorentz compression of a relativistic effect (Fig. 3.2). The half-opening angle of the BM radiation in the vertical direction is γ À1 , which is called the "photon natural emission angle," and γ is a Lorentz factor given by
where c is the speed of light, and v, m 0 , and E are the speed, rest mass, and energy of the electron, respectively. In the case of E ¼ 8 GeV, γ À1 ¼ 6:4 Â 10 À5 rad, which indicates the BM radiation is highly directional in the vertical direction. On the other hand, the BM radiation is emitted along a curved electron obit, so its opening angle in the horizontal direction is determined by a slit opening installed in the downstream section and is typically in the order of milliradians (Fig. 3.2). The SR light emitted from the electrons is observed as a pulse-like electromagnetic wave by an observer standing in the direction tangential to the electron orbit. The spectral distribution of SR light is calculated by a Fourier transform of the time structure of the electromagnetic wave, as shown in Fig. 3.3. The wavelength of radiation emitted from the moving electron is shifted to shorter values due to the Doppler effect. Thus, a storage ring with higher energy emits SR light with higher energy. The critical energy of BM radiation, E c , which is defined as the energy that divides the emitted power into equal halves, is given by
where R is the radius of the electron orbit, and B 0 is the magnetic flux density of the BM. In the case of SPring-8 (E ¼ 8 GeV, B 0 ¼ 0.679 T), E c ¼ 28:9 keV. The maximum energy applicable to XAFS measurements is about three to four times E c , which is higher than 100 keV at SPring-8.

Insertion-Device Sources
An insertion device (ID) consists of a linearly arranged periodic magnet array (Fig. 3.4) installed in the straight section between the BMs (Fig. 3.1). The electrons are made to wiggle by periodic accelerations due to the spatially periodic magnetic field. SR is generated at each acceleration point, and generated SRs are summed to generate an extremely intense light. In the case of the magnet array shown in Fig. 3.4, the electrons wiggle in a sinusoidal manner. The deflection angle of an electron, φ, is given by
where λ u is the period length of the magnet, and K is defined by K is called the K-parameter (or deflection parameter) and determines the maximum deflection angle of the electron, Kγ À1 . The characteristics of the radiation emitted by the ID strongly depend on the value of K, which can be controlled by the magnetic-field strength. Accordingly, two types of ID are available: wiggler (K ) 1) and undulator (K ≲ 1).
In the case of the undulator, the electron beam wiggles with a deflection angle close to or smaller than the photon natural emission angle, γ À1 . In the case of K ( 1, the radiation emitted by the same electron beam at each period of the magnetic field interferes. The amplitude of the emitted radiation thus add up coherently, thereby increasing the radiation intensity N 2 -fold (three to four orders) higher than the BM radiation (where N is the number of periods). The observed electromagnetic field of the radiation is close to a sinusoidal wave of the same period as that of the magnet; therefore, the spectrum obtained by its Fourier transform is monochromatic. In the case of K ~1, only the radiation emitted at a deflection angle smaller than γ À1 can be observed. Accordingly, the observed electromagnetic field is a modified sinusoidal wave, and the spectrum consists of harmonics as shown in Fig. 3.5. Energy of the nth harmonic, E n , is given by
E n can be controlled by the magnet gap of the undulator. When narrowing the magnet gap, K increases in proportional to B 0 (Eq. 3.4), and then E n decreases. The energy bandwidth of the undulator radiation, ΔE/E is usually 2-3 %. ΔE is a few-hundred electronvolts at 10 keV, which is adequate for XANES measurement but not for EXAFS measurement.
The Quick EXAFS and energy-dispersive EXAFS measurements presented in Sect. 10.1 and Chap. 11 need energy bandwidth wider than 1 keV. A tapered undulator was thus developed to adjust the energy bandwidth by tuning the taper of the gap of the magnet array (see Sect. 10.1). The coherency of the undulator radiation, however, decreases due to the disturbed magnetic-field periodicity.
In the wiggler, the electron beam wiggles with a large deviation angle, so only the radiation emitted at poles can be observed. The radiation intensities, not amplitudes, add up, thereby increasing the radiation intensity N-fold (a multi-pole wiggler). The observed electromagnetic field is a periodic positive-and-negative pulse train, so the spectrum is similar to that of BM (Fig. 3.3). As a result, bright and spectrally continuous light with short wavelengths is obtained. When increasing B 0 more than that of the BM by narrowing the magnet gap, E n shifts to high (Eq. 3.2). Some compact or mid-class SR facilities have installed multi-pole wigglers in XAFS beamlines as an energy shifter.
The characteristics of the SR light mentioned above correspond to the case of an ideal electron beam in the ring. The actual electrons run in groups and have a finite spatial, angular, and energy spread, which influence the characteristics of the SR light. In the accumulation ring, a specific number of the electron population (bunch) runs at specific time intervals. A pulsed SR light is emitted at this time interval. Filling patterns of the electron bunch (Fig. 3.6) are designed for the specific timeresolved measurements described in Sect. 13.3.

X-Ray Optics
The XAFS measurement is conducted by measuring X-ray absorption accurately at X-ray energies around the absorption edge of the target element. The requirements for measuring high-quality XAFS spectra are narrow X-ray-energy bandwidth (high energy resolution), low harmonic X-rays contaminant incident on the sample, adequate beam size for the measurement, a stable and low-noise measurement system, and a homogeneous sample. Most XAFS beamlines are constructed with the aim of satisfying the first four requirements. In many cases, the quality of the spectra is determined by sample preparation. The beamline design required for accurate XAFS measurement is described in the following sections.
SR beamlines consist of a light source, a front end section, an optics hutch, and experimental hutches (Fig. 3.1). The beam specifications, such as energy, size, and higher harmonics amounts, are adjusted to accommodate XAFS measurement using X-ray optics, such as a monochromator and a mirror.

Monochromator
The monochromator diffracts monochromatic X-rays of selected energy by adjusting the inclination angle of the net plane of the crystal (the angle of diffraction), θ B , according to Bragg's low (Eq. 3.6) [2].
where d is lattice spacing of the crystal (d-spacing). A single crystal silicon has been most widely used for the monochromator crystal, since it has excellent characteristics, such as good crystal perfection, good thermal property, and large crystal size.
The energy bandwidth (energy resolution) of the diffracted beam is calculated from Eq. (3.6) and given by
where Δθ D is intrinsic diffraction width of the crystal, and Δθ I is divergence angle of the incident beam. To achieve high energy resolution, both Δθ D and Δθ I have to be small. Higher-order net planes have smaller Δθ D and realize higher energy resolution, but lower diffracted-beam intensity. Many XAFS beamlines operated in the hard-X-ray region use Si(1 1 1) crystal based on the diffracted-beam intensity with ΔE/E ≲ 2 Â 10 À4 . X-ay beam position must be kept fixed on the sample during XAFS scan. Accordingly, a conventional XAFS monochromator uses double crystals in parallel arrangement (double crystal monochromator, DCM) (Fig. 3.7). In the former, the position of the first or second crystal is adjusted to fix the exit beam height, h, during the energy scan according to Eq. (3.9) as
To cover a wide energy range, switching mechanisms of multiple crystal pairs or net planes of the crystal are installed. The first crystal is usually mounted on a metal block cooled by water or liquid nitrogen to withstand the heat load of the SR.

Mirror
An X-ray mirror utilizes the total reflection by a material surface. At the interface of a vacuum and a material with refractive index n, the critical angle of total reflection, θ c , is deduced by Snell's law, given by
In the case of neglecting an absorption factor,
where ρ is the weight density of the material (g/cm 3 ). In the hard X-ray region, δ is 10 À4 -10 À5 , so θ c is 1-10 mrad. Thus, the mirror should be long to accept the SR light, such as 1 m. The critical energy of the mirror at the mirror glancing angle of θ i is given by
The surface of the mirror substrate, such as SiO 2 and Si, is highly polished for high reflectivity and coated with high-weight-density materials, such as platinum (ρ ¼ 21.4 g/cm 3 ) and rhodium (ρ ¼ 12.4 g/cm 3 ). In the XAFS beamline, rhodium is usually used because platinum L-absorption edges disturb the XAFS spectra from The mirror is used mainly for three purposes: focusing, collimation, and higherenergy rejection. The mirror surface for focusing and collimation is shaped as a one-or two-dimensional figured shape. A toroidal mirror for two-dimensional focusing is shown in Fig. 3.9. The toroidal shape is approximately realized by bending a sagittal cylinder mirror in the meridional direction (pseudo toroidal mirror). The radiuses of curvature in the meridional and sagittal directions are given by Eqs. (3.13) and (3.14), respectively,
where p and q are distances from source to mirror and from mirror to focus, respectively. In the case of a collimation mirror, q ¼ 1. In the case of a hard-Xray conventional mirror, p ¼ 15 À 50 m, q ¼ 5 À 20 m, and θ i ¼ 1 À 10 mad, so R m ¼ 0:1 À 10 km and R s ¼ 30 À 100 mm. In the case of an XAFS beamline, rejection of the higher harmonics diffracted by the monochromator is the most important requirement. Two methods are applied to meet this requirement. One is to detune the parallelism of the double crystal of the monochromator so as to reduce the diffracted beam flux of higher harmonics due to the difference of intrinsic diffraction width. The other is to use the critical energy of the mirror. A double mirror effectively and stably reduces the higher harmonics to less than 10 À4 . The beamline and its optics are described in the next sections.

Beamline

Bending Magnet and Wiggler Beamline
The designs of the BM and wiggler beamlines are similar, since their spectral shapes are almost the same. The schematic layout of the main optics in BM beamline BL01B1 at SPring-8, which is dedicated to conventional XAFS measurement in a wide energy range, is shown in Fig. 3.10 [4]. The DCM has a switching mechanism of the net plane of the crystal between Si(1 1 1), (3 1 1) and (5 1 1) to cover an energy range from 3.8 to 113 keV. BL01B1 has two mirrors installed upstream and downstream of the DCM. Both mirrors are meridional bent-flat types. The first mirror is used for beam collimation to achieve high energy resolution, and the second mirror is used for beam focusing at the sample in the vertical direction. Both mirrors are also used for the higher harmonic rejection. The glancing angle and bending radius of both mirrors are adjusted according to the critical energy of the X-rays. A change in the glancing angle of the first mirror necessitates a change in the height of the downstream components, sample and detectors.
In the BM beamline, the horizontal beam width at the mirror is more than several tens millimeters. Accordingly, a vertical reflecting (pseudo) toroidal mirror is often used for accepting a wide beam and conducting two-dimensional focusing at the sample.

Undulator Beamline
An undulator XAFS beamline has the following features differing from those of a BM or wiggler beamline. First, the beam divergence, both in the vertical and horizontal directions, is quite small, enabling the monochromator and mirror to take both vertical and horizontal deflection geometries. The beam divergence in the vertical direction is close to the slope error of the mirror surface, so a collimation mirror is not needed. A stripe-coat mirror can be used to switch coating materials, such as platinum and rhodium. Second, the beam power density is quite high. In most cases, the first crystal of the DCM is cooled by liquid nitrogen. Third, the undulator gap is tuned at each measurement point in synchronization with the Bragg angle of the monochromator crystal, since the energy bandwidth of the undulator radiation is narrow. Fourth, the source size and divergence is small and useful for formation of a high-flux-density micro/nano X-ray beam by using focusing optics, such as a Kirkpatrick-Baez mirror and a Fresnel zone plate (described in Chap. 13).
The undulator beam has many advantages regarding beam quality (as mentioned above), which is indispensable for advanced XAFS measurements, such as fast time-resolved XAFS, micro/nano XAFS using a focused beam, polarized XAFS, and high energy resolution XAFS (described in Part 4). Most conventional XAFS measurements, however, do not need a high-quality undulator beam. In some cases, sample damage due to intense undulator X-ray beam irradiation is a serious problem.
Chapter 4

XFEL

Makina Yabashi and Tetsuo Katayama
The twenty-first century saw the arrival of an exciting new light source, X-ray free electron lasers (XFELs). XFELs generate ultra-brilliant, coherent, and femtosecond X-ray pulses. X-ray spectroscopy is one of the most promising applications using XFEL, allowing one to directly probe ultrafast changes in electronic states and geometric structures during real chemical reactions at angstrom and femtosecond resolution using X-ray absorption and/or emission measurements.
In 2009, the Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS) at the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory in the USA generated the first FEL light in the hard X-ray region based on a self-amplified spontaneous emission (SASE) scheme [1]. In 2011, the SPring-8 Compact Angstrom free electron LAser (SACLA) at the SPring-8 complex in Japan produced the shortest wavelength XFEL light using a compact-scale facility [2][3][4]. Table 4.1 shows typical parameters for SACLA electron and photon beams. Every single pulse contains >10 11 X-ray photons within a sub-mm beam diameter at the sample point. The beam size can be further reduced to 1 μm or even smaller using state-of-the-art reflective focusing optics [5,6]. The spectral width provided by the SASE scheme is typically ~50 eV in full width at half maximum (FWHM) at 10 keV. The temporal duration of an XFEL pulse can be as short as several femtoseconds, which enables one to conduct timeresolved measurements in the femtosecond regime by combining ultrafast optical lasers. Although possible arrival timing jitters between the XFEL and optical laser pulses can deteriorate the temporal resolution, recently developed techniques to measure the arrival jitter in every pulse can provide higher temporal resolution of the order of 10 fs for example [7,8].
For performing X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) experiments using an XFEL source, one can consider two complementary schemes: a wavelength scanning method and a dispersive method, similar to those used in synchrotron light sources. The former method, combined with fluorescence detection, provides a high sensitivity to small changes of X-ray absorbance in shallow volumes interacting with optical lasers [9,10]. The latter method is useful for achieving an ultimate temporal resolution with simultaneous detection of the whole spectrum. Although the bandwidth of the SASE-XFEL light matches that required for the latter scheme, the random, stochastic spikes in the spectrum, which originate from the initial density modulations in the electron beam with typical widths from ~0.01 to ~1 eV [11], present considerable complications to data analysis, especially in the normalization processes. To overcome this difficulty, Katayama et al. developed a dualbeam dispersive XAS scheme [12], which combines a transmission-grating beam splitter and a dispersive spectrometer that consists of an elliptical mirror, a flat crystal analyzer, and an imaging detector [13]. Here, the positive first order diffraction of the grating was dedicated for measuring the XAS signal with samples, while the negative first order diffraction was used for normalization, as shown in Fig. 4.1. This scheme enabled sufficient sensitivity of the order of 10 À3 for the absorbance change using pump laser excitation [14].
X-ray emission spectroscopy (XES) is also a powerful technique to understand the charge and spin dynamics in the femtosecond regime. For this purpose, a dispersive scheme in a von Hamos geometry is preferable for detecting the whole emission spectrum [15]. Since most XES measurements are time consuming, development of emission spectrometers with higher resolution and efficiency would contribute to enhanced data quality.   Measurements and Detectors Masaharu Nomura

Transmission Measurement
XAFS spectra are measured in several modes such as transmission, fluorescence, and electron yield. Transmission mode is the basic of XAFS and is usually used to rather concentrated samples. The experimental setup is very simple as shown in Fig. 5.1. Two ionization chambers are put in a line and a sample is placed between them. The first ionization chamber is used to measure the intensity of the incoming X-rays (I 0 ) and the second one is used to measure that passed through the sample (I or I 1 ). The apparent absorbance is calculated as μt ¼ ln(I 0 /I). The detection efficiency for I 0 is 10-25 % and slightly lower than 100 % for I. 1 Length, composition, and pressure of the fill gas should be changed to meet these conditions. Sometimes the third ionization chamber (I 2 ) is used for the sake of energy calibration. In this case a reference sample is placed between I 1 and I 2 ionization chambers. 2 This technique is useful to discuss the small shift of absorption edge. The structure of ionization chamber is simple, that is, two electrodes are aligned in parallel in a sealed box with two thin windows and the box is filled with a gas or a mixture of gases. X-rays are absorbed by atoms in the fill gas, ionizing them and forming electron-ion pairs. The emitted electrons ionize atoms in the fill gas. Typically 20-30 eV is required to produce an electron-ion pair in average. 3 By measuring the electron or ion current, we can know the X-ray intensity. Since the ion and electron recombine easily, electric field of ca. 1 kV/cm or more is applied between two electrodes to prevent recombination. If the electric field is not sufficient, nonnegligible part of electrons and ions recombines and the degree of recombination changes as functions of X-ray flux and energy, thus losing the linearity of the detection system. When the electric field is not sufficient, the output current increases with increasing the applied electric field. The output current becomes constant when enough high field is applied. The output current becomes fairly stable if twice high field is applied.
Ripples in high voltage power supply used to apply electric field become a source of noise, and thus very low noise power supply is required. The surface of insulators used in ionization chamber should be kept clean and dry since leakage current also becomes the origin of noise. Output current from an ionization chamber is sent to a fast current amplifier, the output voltage from it is converted to digital signal by using Analog-to-Digital converter (ADC) or a pair of Voltage-to-Frequency (V/F) converter and a scaler (pulse counter). The longer the time constant of the current amplifier, the smaller the noise. Thus, it should be carefully selected, especially when quick scanning XAFS is used.
Preparing uniform sample with appropriate absorbance is the most important point when measuring XAFS in transmission mode. X-rays pass through the thin part of sample is less absorbed thus gives incorrect μt in total [1]. It is recommended to prepare some samples of different thickness and compare their χ. If the amplitudes of χ are different, more careful sample preparation is required.
If the linearity of the detection system is good, μt signal becomes continuous even before and after beam injection. However, users cannot experience beam injections in recent synchrotron facilities since top-up injection is adopted. In such cases a simple performance test described below becomes useful. When a sample is placed before the entrance slit in place of the usual sample position, there should not appear any absorption edge in the XAFS spectrum. However, sometimes apparent "edge" is observed on the spectrum as shown in Fig. 5.2. If it is observed, one or some of the following reasons are suspected.
(a) nonlinearity of the detection system, (b) improper offset adjustment of the detection system, (c) significant higher order content in the incoming X-ray beam.

Fluorescence
When the concentration of the element of interest becomes low (ex. 10 mmol dm À3 Cu aq.), it becomes hard to extract correct χ signal from transmission mode measurements (Fig. 5.3). In such cases, fluorescent mode XAFS that is to measure the intensity of fluorescent X-ray from the element of interest in place of transmitted X-ray becomes effective [2]. Fluorescence yield (FY) mode can be applied to a thin, concentrated sample and a dilute, thick sample. In these cases, the penetration depth of X-rays does not change significantly, and thus, observe the same sample depth within an XAFS spectrum. Thin metal layer on a substrate is a former example and dilute solutions, impurities in a sample are the latter example. Thus concentrated bulk samples should not be measured with fluorescent detection mode. The major source of noise (N ) in fluorescence XAFS is statistical variation of detected photons, which includes the variation of both the fluorescence photons of interest (S) and background photons (B). The S/N ratio becomes S/(S þ B) 1/2 . In some cases such as biological samples, S/B becomes less than 0.01, and thus, it is very important to isolate the fluorescence signal.  A fluorescent ion chamber (ϕ8.25 cm Â 3 cm) 4 is often used combined with filter and a slit assembly [3]. The principle of the fluorescent ion chamber is the same as that used in transmission mode but usually lower electric field is applied since the flux density of the fluorescent X-ray is much lower than that of incoming one. A filter is placed to absorb the scattered X-rays while passing the fluorescent X-ray from the sample. Z-1 filter (Z is the atomic number of the element of interest in the sample) is often used, but there are some possibilities for heavy elements and no appropriate one for light elements. When scattered X-ray is absorbed by the filter, fluorescent X-ray is emitted from it. A slit assembly is used to minimize it detected by the ion chamber. Figure 5.4 shows the XAFS spectrum of the same sample as shown in Fig. 5.3 taken with a fluorescent ion chamber with an Ni filter.
Combination of the filter and slit assembly is fairly powerful but cannot remove the scattered X-rays well when the scattered X-ray is much intense than the fluorescent one. In such cases, more powerful detection system is required. When a semiconductor absorbs an X-ray photon, electron-hole pairs are produced. The typical energy to produce it is ca. 3 eV in the case of Ge. Since the produced charge is one order larger than that in ionization chamber, each pulse signal produced by an X-ray photon can be handled separately. In this case, the pulse height of the signal reflects the energy of absorbed X-ray photon, and thus can distinguish the fluorescent signal and scattered one by using analog electronics or digital signal processor. Typical energy resolution (ΔE) is 130-300 eV for 5.9 keV X-ray photon (E) according to the size of the detector and shaping time of signal processing electronics. Pure Ge detector is usually used since it has high detection efficiency even for high energy X-rays and gives fairly good energy resolution [4]. Recently, silicon drift detector (SDD) is also used [5] since this is less expensive than Ge detector and easier to use. But its detection area is rather small, and the detection efficiency decreases to 50 % at 15 keV and 14 % at 25 keV because of low absorption constant and thin (ca. 0.3 mm) detection layer.  5 corresponds to the total counting rate including the fluorescence and scattering signal, which corresponds to the integrated area of the right scheme. Output signal corresponds to the fluorescence signal intensity, which corresponds to the colored peak area. The output signal does not linearly respond to ICR; this is called as counting loss. This is due to that signal processing electronics cannot process the next signal for certain period after it processes a signal (dead time). The shorter shaping time (faster electronics) gives closer response to a linear line but gives worse energy resolution; the counting rate and the energy resolution are trade-off. The difference between the true counting rate and apparent one is called as counting loss. Since these curves reproduce well under certain condition, the original count rate can be calculated by using the ICR signal and output signal. Two fluorescent XAFS spectra are shown in Fig. 5.6a. One is the raw data which encountered beam injection while measuring a spectrum and gave rise to show discontinuity in the spectrum. When it is corrected for counting loss, the spectrum becomes continuous. Actually k 3 χ signal continues as shown in Fig. 5.6b. As shown above, the correction for counting loss is inevitable except when the total counting rate is very low. Although semiconductor detectors are powerful for fluorescent XAFS, their energy resolution sometimes becomes insufficient. That is neighboring peaks cannot be separated when the energy difference between them is smaller than the energy resolution of the detector. If the fluorescence peak cannot be separated, the S/N ratio becomes lower. In such cases, detection system with better energy resolution is required. One is a superconducting tunnel junction detector (STJ) [6]. The energy resolution is reported as 15 eV at 600 eV. STJ detector is suited for rather low energy X-rays. The other way is to use a crystal analyzer where the fluorescence X-ray is isolated by a crystal monochromator. Bent crystal Laue Analyzer (BCLA) [7] is often used. Small beam spot on the sample is used since the energy resolution of BCLA is limited by it.

Electron Yield
Total electron yield mode is often used in soft X-ray region since transmission mode is hard to use and fluorescence yield is rather low and the sample is placed under vacuum in general. The current from a high transmission (ca. 80 %) grid or thin metal foil is used as an I 0 -monitor and that from the sample is used as I signal. Special care should be paid to the selection of materials used for grid or foil since fluorescent X-rays from impurities disturb measurements. When the current is too low, an electron multiplier is used in place of a direct current measurement.
Electron yield is also used in hard X-ray region in order to obtain the information from the surface layers (several tens nm). The principle is similar to that of ionization chamber and the ion or electron current emitted from the sample is measured; sample itself is an electrode. Sample cell is filled with He gas so as to minimize the ionization of the fill gas by X-ray. This method is called as Conversion Electron Yield (CEY). If thin aluminized Mylar © is used as a counter electrode and put a fluorescence detector behind it, both FY and CEY XAFS spectra can be measured simultaneously.

Special Detection Modes
The above described three modes are usually used for XAFS measurements, but some special modes are reported and they may be useful in some special cases. One is to detect X-ray Excited Optical Luminescence (XEOL). In some cases XEOL can be used for site-selective measurements [8]. But XEOL gives curious spectra in some cases, and thus, it should be carefully examined if the obtained spectrum corresponds to true XAFS signal [9]. Another site-specific XAFS is Diffraction Anomalous Fine Structure (DAFS), which is a technique to measure the XAFS signal in diffraction spots [10]. Measurement of total reflected X-ray intensity is used to obtain surface sensitive information [11], but fluorescence XAFS under total reflection condition is more popular.

Chapter 6
Cell Designs for In Situ and Operando Studies Dmitry E. Doronkin, Henning Lichtenberg, and Jan-Dierk Grunwaldt

Introduction and Criteria for the Choice of an Appropriate Cell
The design of appropriate spectroscopic cells for in situ and operando XAFS studies of heterogeneous catalysts has been a very active field during the past decades as the investigation of catalysts at work has become a powerful approach to improve the activity and selectivity of catalysts in a rational manner [1][2][3][4]. The inherent advantage of X-rays is due to their penetrating power through solids, gases and liquids. The structural information can be gained under reaction conditions with reactors with similar geometry to those used in industrial catalysis. Various cells for in situ (e.g., in a gas atmosphere) or operando (i.e., while measuring the catalytic performance) spectroscopic studies have already been designed since the 1980s [5].
Still, during the past years a number of new in situ cells have been developed, e.g., to combine XAFS with complementary techniques [6], to optimize the geometry for XAS in fluorescence mode [7], to investigate heterogeneous catalysts in liquid phase [8] or to extend in situ XAS studies to high pressure reactions [9]. Hence, many different cell designs exist, which are mostly unique and tailored to a specific application. Only a few of them are commercially available [9,10], and most of them are constructed by the research groups themselves. Recently, attempts to exchange experience and develop infrastructure for catalysis studies at synchrotrons emerged for example in the US (Synchrotron Catalysis Consortium, SCC) [11] as well as in Europe (e.g., SNBL [12,13] and DUBBLE [14] beamlines at ESRF, SAMBA beamline [9] at SOLEIL and catalysis research at ANKA [15]).
Many of these organizations even provide infrastructure and support for the users without synchrotron experience; however, choosing an appropriate cell is a critical decision for a successful experiment.
The reasons for the wide variety of in situ cells are manifold. One of the main reasons is the high number of different applications. A spectroscopic cell for studying a catalyst while it is working (e.g., in a fast reaction) needs a completely different design than a cell for a catalyst that acts in a slow reaction which is not mass transfer limited, a reaction in liquid phase or an experiment where the catalyst is studied after reduction. Grunwaldt et al. [16] have described criteria to guide this development of in situ cells from the start of the construction to aim finally at the "best compromise"; many of those criteria are similar to those in the chemical engineering literature. An overview on different spectroscopic cells and the history of development of the in situ cells for XAFS studies of catalysts was furthermore given by Bare and Ressler [17]. The following considerations are important when choosing the appropriate cell:
• Are the data to be collected in transmission or in fluorescence mode? This depends on a number of factors including the nature of the sample (concentration of the element of interest and homogeneity of its distribution in the sample), the experimental design, and the necessity to combine XAFS with other spectroscopic techniques. • The range of the photon energies to be covered. This is crucial for choosing the appropriate material and the thickness of X-ray windows. • Operating temperatures and pressures as well as chemical compatibility of reactants with window, reactor and sealing materials. Maximum heating and cooling ramps, which are limited by the thermal mass of the cell. • In case of catalytic reactions: Is the reaction fast or slow (internal mass transport limitations)? Does it occur in gas phase or liquid or even three-phase mixture (external mass transport limitations)? • Are accurate measurements of catalyst activity, selectivity, and the temperature of the catalyst bed necessary? In particular, will the measurements be carried out under operando conditions? • Are specific safety issues to be considered? • Are spatially or time resolved studies (resolution) required? • Should the XAS experiment be combined with other spectroscopic techniques?
Irrespective of the type of the cell an important decision has to be made concerning the X-ray transparent window material. The material has to absorb the minimum amount of incoming, transmitted and/or fluorescence X-rays and needs to be chemically, temperature, and mechanically stable for the desired application. The most commonly used X-ray window materials include beryllium, Kapton ® (polyimide), quartz, glassy carbon, and boron nitride. For high pressure in situ cells and studies at higher photon energies (typically more than 10 keV) foils of light metals, e.g., Al or Ti can serve as X-ray windows. If a combination of techniques is required the window has to be transparent for all used photon energies, e.g., when combining XAS with simultaneous Raman measurements quartz reactors [13] or cells with mica windows [9] are used.
In general, a cell design fulfilling all wishes of an experimentalist is rarely possible or available which results in compromises between the XAFS data quality and catalytic performance, easiness of operation, safety, and many more aspects. A comparison of in situ cells of principally different design concepts in terms of both spectral data quality and the relevance for the reaction kinetic (operando) measurements was reported by Grunwaldt et al. (Fig. 6.1) [16]. The more common design with a catalyst wafer (pressed pellet) placed in an environmental cell with gas flowing around the pellet (Fig. 6.1a) showed its suitability for obtaining good spectral quality data with homogeneous beam transmission. This makes this cell type suitable also for measurements with position-sensitive detectors, i.e., for energy dispersive EXAFS. An improved design of this cell, which is also used for infrared spectroscopy [18], involves gas flowing through a pellet (Fig. 6.1b). This design ensures gas diffusion through the entire cross section of a sample pellet; however, it requires preparation of pellets with sufficient porosity, e.g., using γ-alumina as a binder material which is not always possible without altering the catalytic properties of the sample material [16]. The other cell in the comparison was a capillary microreactor as example of plug-flow reactor geometry and catalyst in form of 80-120 μm particles (Fig. 6.1c), based on concepts by Clausen et al. [19] and Thomas et al. [20], and a powder sample in an enclosed cell reported by Bazin et al. [21]. While the pellet cell allowed higher quality XAFS data acquisition, the diffusion limitations through a catalyst wafer resulted in markedly different kinetics during temperature-programmed reduction of CuO/ZnO when compared to catalyst grains such as in a capillary cell. In the case of fast catalytic reactions (e.g., oxidation of methane over PdO x /ZrO 2 ) gas bypass in the pellet cell and especially internal mass transport limitations were shown not only to significantly influence the measured catalytic data but also falsify conclusions on the structure since only the outer surface is really exposed to the reaction mixture [16].
The reason for different kinetics of Cu reduction is just due to internal mass transfer limitations as demonstrated in ref. [16]. For spherical particles the reaction time τ can be calculated using the shrinking core model: where ρ CuO is the molar density of CuO in a particle, D e is the effective diffusion coefficient, R p is a particle radius (or pellet thickness), and C H2 is the hydrogen concentration. For an effective diffusion coefficient of 10 À6 -10 À8 m 2 /s and a 100 μm particle τ amounts to 20 ms-2 s. This is already in the time range of time resolved studies using QEXAFS [22] and DEXAFS [23] and should be taken into account, i.e., a reaction faster than %1 ms may be hampered by internal diffusion or external mass transport, even in the ideal case of a sieved catalyst. Similar considerations apply to pressed catalyst wafers (pellets) where the total reduction time with the diffusion coefficients given above and 2 mm pellet thickness amounts to 33 s-56 min (depending on the porosity of the binder material) which makes it inapplicable for time-resolved experiments. Internal mass transport may not only play a role during dynamic changes of temperature or concentration but also may even occur under stationary reaction conditions if the reaction rates are high such as for oxidation of methane. In heterogeneous catalysis, this is typically reflected by the "effectiveness factor" of the catalyst and estimated using the Thiele modulus [24]. Due to the high reaction rate the reactant (e.g., methane) is already consumed while diffusing into the porous solid catalyst and the inner part of the catalyst may thus not interact with the reactant at all. Since XAS experiments typically probe the whole catalyst and average the contributions from all atoms of a specific element, this will also strongly affect or even falsify the spectroscopic result. Figure 6.2 shows an example of a methane concentration gradient calculated for the total oxidation of methane over Pd-based catalysts based on a reaction rate constant k r ¼ 1.55 Á 10 3 s À1 and an effective diffusion coefficient D e ¼ 1.1 Á 10 À6 m 2 s À1 [16]. Whereas the concentration in an 80 μm large particle (sieved catalyst) only drops to 90 % of the surface concentration, the concentration of methane in a selfsupporting disk drops to less than 10 % already at a penetration depth of 70 μm. This means that, in case of a net wafer thickness of 1 mm, transmission XAS will only to Fig. 6.2 Calculated profiles of the methane concentration (normalized by the surface concentration) during the total oxidation of methane for the cases of a 1 mm thick pellet and an 80 μm particle. Adapted from ref. [16] and ref. [25] with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies a minor extent monitor the area within the catalyst where the reaction occurs. The effectiveness for a pressed wafer is with 3 % much lower than for a particle of 80 μm (88 %). For a Thiele modulus
the methane concentration drops to less than 10 % at the center of the catalyst particle (L c is a characteristic length defined as half of the thickness for a disk and 1/6 of the particle diameter for round-shaped particles, cf. ref. [24]; k r is the rate constant). Hence, the Thiele modulus is a very useful parameter which indicates whether internal mass transport is limiting and thus well suited for optimizing in situ and, especially, operando spectroscopic cells.
In conclusion, for fast reactions a finely sieved powder catalyst should preferentially be used. Similar considerations as for gas phase experiments can be made for liquids and higher pressure studies, where also external mass transport limitations at the fluid/solid interface may occur [16]. This compromise keeps the design of new in situ cells a very active field to fulfill the best spectroscopic conditions (depending on the photon energy, concentration of the element of interest as well as the required spatial resolution) and optimum catalytic conditions (gas phase, liquid phase, high pressure, temperature profiles, mass transfer limitations, continuous flow or batch-like). Therefore, there cannot be a universal solution. Instead, different applications require specific cell designs.

In Situ Cells for Studies of Catalysts in Form of Powders and Pellets
One of the first cells for the in situ XAFS studies of catalysts was designed by F. Lytle et al. [5]. The design (Fig. 6.3) has been adopted by many research groups and it is one of the few commercially available cells [26]. It allows transmission measurements on both self-supporting wafers and powders using a special boattype inset. An additional ion chamber detector with a built-in amplifier is available for measurements in fluorescence mode. The gas atmosphere may be changed and the cell can be evacuated. The maximum pressure is rated up to 100 bar. It is possible to cool the sample holder with liquid nitrogen and to heat it up to approx. 1000 K using a built-in resistance heating unit. At the same time the outer shell of the cell is water-cooled to prevent heating the beamline components and the fluorescence detector. One downside of the design is the gas bypassing the sample which prevents obtaining quantitative catalytic data acquisition. The other drawback is that the temperature of the catalyst sample cannot be measured directly. A significant improvement of the same general layout was reported by Hannemann et al. (Fig. 6.4) [7]. This cell allows measurements on (preferentially) powders (like the cell by Bazin et al. [21]) and self-supported wafers (pressed into the sample compartment). It mimics a plug flow reactor, is suitable for both gas and liquid environments and additionally allows online products analysis. The sample holder further allows cooling down to the temperature of liquid nitrogen and heating to 973 K. The heating is localized so that the temperature of the outer body does not exceed 423 K even without water cooling. The inner volume of the cell can be evacuated (e.g., to prevent ice formation on the X-ray windows during measurements at liquid nitrogen temperature) or filled with He for measurements at low energies. Different materials can be used for the sample holder depending on photon energy, pressure and the chemical nature of reactants/products. The thickness of the sample can be varied by using reaction cell insets of different thickness. A variable sample positioning angle relative to the beam, wide windows and funnel-shaped cutouts in the sample holder allow measurements of X-ray fluorescence and X-ray diffraction simultaneously with XAFS measurements in transmission mode. Notably, due to the windows on all four sides of the cell it can be used at many different beamlines with different detector arrangement.
A much simpler but not less versatile cell was originally suggested by Clausen et al. [19] and Thomas et al. [20], and further developed by Grunwaldt et al. (Fig. 6.5a) [16]. The concept is based on a thin quartz (or glass) capillary (0.5-3 mm o.d., 10-20 μm wall thickness, available from for example Hilgenberg GmbH, Hampton Research, and a number of other suppliers) connected to a gas dosing and a gas analysis units by means of graphite ferrules [16] or high-temperature epoxy glue for gas-tight sealing [27]. The catalyst, in form of small grains (grain size is typically within 50-150 μm range), is placed between two quartz wool plugs, and the overall assembly has a geometry of a regular plug-flow catalytic reactor with virtually no dead volume. The capillary can be cooled or heated by cold or hot nitrogen (air) blowers. Some of them are commercially available, e.g., a Cryojet from Oxford Instruments (85-500 K) [28] and a gas blower built by Cyberstar S.A. (now by FMB-Oxford, heating up to 1273 K) [29]. An alternative air blower LE Mini Sensor Fig. 6.5 (a) A photograph of the capillary cell used by Grunwaldt et al. [16], here mounted on top of a FMB Oxford Gas Blower (heater). The capillary microreactor is glued in the stainless steel holder by means of high-temperature epoxy-glue. (b) IR thermography image of the temperature distribution in a microreactor capillary filled with a Pt/Al 2 O 3 catalyst at 400 C Gas Blower setpoint in a flow of 50 ml/min He from Leister Technologies AG originally designed for the plastic packaging industry can be used up to 900 K [26].
The remarkable versatility of this design allows simultaneous measurements of X-ray absorption, fluorescence, diffraction [6], and also optical spectroscopy such as Raman [6,13] or UV-Vis [30]. The capillary microreactor cell is also suitable for studies of photocatalysts under working conditions [31]. Catalytic data can be measured and evaluated as for any conventional plug-flow reactor. There are certain drawbacks of the design, which should be taken into account when planning an experiment. First of all, precise measurement of the catalyst temperature is not possible, second, as for all plug-flow reactors, in case of fast reactions concentration gradients along the catalyst bed will occur [32]. Furthermore, although the cell was tested under pressures up to 50 bar [19], the actual maximum pressure depends on the particular capillary and cannot be defined a priori. Heating by a gas stream leads to temperature gradients (e.g., Fig. 6.5b) which may be critical and should be taken into account for certain catalytic reactions, e.g., total oxidation [33] with steep light-off curves. Some of the drawbacks can be negotiated with, i.e., heating of the catalyst by the intense X-ray beam can be estimated based on the change in the catalytic conversion [34], and in the case of concentration gradients spatially resolved XAS measurements are required [32,35].
For high throughput X-ray absorption studies (to increase the number of measured catalysts) also a microreactor array was developed that allows to study the structural changes in six to ten solid samples with an independent gas supply to each reactor channel and also fast independent MS analysis [36,37] and thereby real simultaneous operando acquisition of XANES spectra of working catalysts. The setup uses a fast CCD camera with X-ray absorption contrast as is schematically shown in Fig. 6.6.
Application of thin walled quartz capillaries limits the maximum pressure and requires several safety precautions against breaking the capillary. Other materials Fig. 6.6 Setup for parallel screening of the structure of heterogeneous catalysts at work using a CCD camera and a microreactor array. Reproduced from ref. [37] with permission.© IOP Publishing. All rights reserved with lower X-ray absorption than that of quartz were suggested for use as plug-flow microreactors. Bazin used carbon foil [21], Bare used Be tubes with 3 mm outer diameter and 0.5-0.75 mm wall thickness operated at temperatures up to 823 K and pressures up to 14 bar as an in situ plug flow reactors [38]. One advantage of the reported design is the possibility to directly measure the temperature of the catalyst bed since the reactor tube is thick enough to accommodate a thermocouple. The other advantage is that due to low X-ray absorption by the Be walls collection of XAFS data at photon energies below 5 keV is possible. The disadvantages lie in the chemical nature of the used beryllium (PF-60 grade Be contains up to 800 ppm Fe and other trace elements, which limits its application for certain catalytic reactions) and the toxicity of Be when oxidized which requires special care during handling [39]. To overcome the disadvantages of Be as reactor material Kispersky et al. reported the use of a vitreous carbon tube (glassy carbon, Fig. 6.7) as a robust relatively low-cost plug-flow in situ reactor [40]. With a 6 mm outer diameter and 4 mm inner diameter it is comparable to the reactors used in laboratory test rigs. The reactor was placed vertically for a down-flow operation which allowed spatially resolved XAFS measurements along the catalyst bed. The reactor can be heated to 823 K in oxidizing atmosphere and has been tested under pressures up to 25 bar. Both reactors of Bare [38] and Kispersky [40] were heated by means of an oven with openings for incoming and transmitted X-rays and as such can be used only for transmission XAS measurements.
High pressure studies (>20 bar) require special reactor designs as most of the X-ray window materials cannot withstand such pressure if made thin enough for low absorption of X-rays [41,42]. Thus, the reactors and windows have to be reinforced. An example of a plug-flow reactor for transmission studies at high pressures (up to 150 bar) is shown in Fig. 6.8. The main body of the reactor is a Fig. 6.7 A glassy carbon reactor installed in a heater block as reported by Kispersky et al. [40]. Reproduced from ref. [40] with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry solid stainless-steel block with bored holes for gas (or liquid) inlet and outlet. The catalyst is placed in the middle channel of the reactor body and covered by graphite sealings and Be windows. Several sets of reactor covers and spacers allow different thicknesses of the catalyst bed. The assembled reactor is heated by a specially designed oven composed of two parts (Fig. 6.8) with a water-or air-cooled outer shell to prevent heating of beamline components and to achieve fast cooling if necessary.

In Situ Cell for Studies in Liquid Phase and at Elevated Pressures
Not all catalytic processes are realized in flow-through reactors. Some liquid-phase reactions and reactions in supercritical fluids require high pressure batch reactors to run [41]. Also, hydrothermal synthesis of catalysts requires autoclaves [43]. An in situ batch autoclave-like reaction cell was reported by Grunwaldt et al. [8]. This cell (Fig. 6.9) mimics a conventional autoclave with a polyether-ether-ketone (PEEK) inset with two beam paths, one in the middle of the cell to probe the liquid phase and one at the bottom to probe the solid catalyst. The total volume of the cell is about 10 ml and it is rated for pressures up to 150 bar. It is equipped with a magnetic stirrer and can be heated up to 473 K. This cell allows monitoring solid species at the bottom and soluble species in the liquid, which may be relevant for sample preparation by hydrothermal or solvothermal synthesis [44], investigation of heterogeneized complexes or Pd-catalyzed Heck-reaction [45,46].

In Situ Cell for Studies of Chemical Sensors
Sensors are another type of nanomaterials closely related to catalysts in terms of structure and gas-solid interaction (cf. Chap. 25). Therefore, as in catalytic studies, characterization of sensing materials should be carried out in a realistic gas atmosphere and at realistic temperatures. For semiconducting sensors an important difference is for example the sandwich structure of sensors which is typically a sandwich consisting of a sensing material, electrodes, a substrate and heater layers [47]. In case of noble metal doped SnO 2 -sensors the strongly absorbing SnO 2matrix and especially the only 50 μm thick screen printed layer for chemical sensors makes transmission XAS measurements difficult or impossible, and therefore, in situ cells optimized for fluorescence measurements are required. In addition to the cell design, the sensor itself should be fabricated in a way to avoid interference of fluorescence from the element of interest and heaters or electrodes, e.g., for studies of Pt-containing sensor materials Au electrodes and Au/Pd heaters can be used [47]. An in situ cell suitable for studies of sensors is depicted in Fig. 6.10 [48]. It consists of a gas tight vessel, sensor heater and readout connectors, large Kapton ® windows, a sensor holder and gas ports. Although primarily designed for fluorescence measurements, X-ray windows on both sides of the cell allow transmission XAS to be recorded as well.
Fig. 6.9 Scheme of an in situ batch cell for studies of liquids and liquid/solid interfaces at high pressures

In Situ Cells for Studies of Electrocatalysts
Unlike photocatalysts, electrocatalysts require specially developed cells for in situ and operando X-ray studies. The design concept of in situ electrochemical cells often reproduces real fuel cells and is based on a sandwich of electrodes. The anode and cathode are coated with the corresponding electrocatalysts and an ion (proton) conducting membrane. If the electrocatalysts to be studied are based on different metals, the only major modification required to adapt the fuel cell to in situ studies is to provide a thinning to serve as X-ray window [49,50]. Some of the electrochemical cells do not require machining and can be built in the laboratory, e.g., an easy-to-build flexible electrochemical "coffee bag" type cell which is composed of a stack of metal and membrane foils in an aluminum bag with X-ray windows [51]. During the XAS experiment using the above mentioned cells, X-rays are transmitted through the whole fuel cell and in such a way anode and cathode materials are studied simultaneously. This works well when absorption edges of anode and cathode catalysts do not overlap, otherwise windows must be made in the anode and cathode layers to be able to study them separately as was done by C. Roth et al. who used a slightly modified commercial fuel cell as an in situ cell [52].

Conclusions and Outlook
The selected examples show that the combination of XAS and related photon-in/ photon-out techniques with reaction cells operating close to realistic conditions provides a very powerful tool to establish structure-function relationships in catalysis and related areas. An appropriate design of spectroscopic cells is one of the keys to successful in situ and operando XAFS studies in gas and liquid phase or even under challenging high pressure conditions. Criteria which are typically applied in chemical engineering are valuable for an optimization of in situ cells for time-resolved and for operando studies. Reaction cell design will remain a very active field in future as one can only aim for the "best compromise" and the criteria described in this chapter may give a hint how to achieve this goal most rapidly. This will significantly contribute to a better understanding of the dynamics of functional materials, in particular the catalyst structure while monitoring the catalytic performance or even the kinetics of catalytic processes.

Part IV
Advanced XAFS Techniques soldatov@rsu.ru

Chapter 7
Quick XAFS Tomoya Uruga

Introduction
Time-Resolved XAFS techniques are powerful tools for investigating the local structure and chemical state during physical and chemical reaction processes and have been used worldwide in synchrotron facilities. There are two major techniques: quick scan XAFS (QXAFS) and energy dispersive XAFS (DXAFS). In this section, the QXAFS techniques are described. The DXAFS techniques are described in Chap. 8.
The QXAFS technique was developed by Frahm et al. [1] in 1988 and has since been improved upon and used worldwide in synchrotron facilities as a standard XAFS measurement method. QXAFS is a relatively simple measurement method that speeds up conventional step scan XAFS by removing unnecessary operations. Conventionally, the step scan XAFS measurement is conducted by measuring the X-ray absorption of a sample at each energy point using a monochromatic X-ray selected by a double crystal monochromator (DCM) (see Chap. 3). The DCM moves to the target energy and stops, and the X-ray intensities and Bragg angle of the DCM crystal are then measured. This operation is repeated point by point at each XAFS measurement energy point for 100-500 points, which results in a time loss of more than several minutes per measurement in addition to the net X-ray exposure time.
Figure 7.1 shows a schematic of the arrangement and control system for transmission mode quick XAFS measurements. In the QXAFS method, the monochromator continuously moves from start to end position during XAFS spectrum measurement. The X-ray detector output signals and the Bragg angles of the monochromator (i.e., the X-ray energy) are individually stored in a high-speed data storage system (such as memory) during continuous scanning. Thus there is no time loss other than the usual X-ray exposure time. QXAFS is also called time-on-the-fly scan mode XAFS. The beamline arrangement and optics of QXAFS can be basically the same as those of conventional step scan XAFS, so many conventional XAFS beamlines started using the QXAFS method with an adapted measurement system and control software, utilizing one DCM for both the step scan XAFS and QXAFS measurements. Most of the newly constructed XAFS beamlines come already installed with the QXAFS mode as a basic measurement method. The technical details of QXAFS and the methods it can be used with are discussed in the following sections. The applications are described in Part 5.

Measurement Method
As described above, in the QXAFS measurement, the X-ray intensities and angle of the monochromator crystal are simultaneously measured and temporarily stored in the memory of each measurement system during continuous monochromator scanning (see Fig. 7.1). The stored data set is transferred to the memory of the PC during or after the spectra measurement, depending on the system. Fast and/or direct data transfer from the measurement system to the memory of the PC during the measurement is required for sequential QXAFS measurement without dead time. The measurement timing is synchronized by trigger signals sent from the PC through a The X-ray energy is calibrated by the Bragg angle of the monochromator measured with an encoder. In fast QXAFS measurement, the X-ray energy is further corrected with the simultaneously measured XAFS spectrum of a standard sample using the beam transmitted through the target sample (see Fig. 7.1).
When operating the QXAFS measurement system, a user can enter the measurement time for one XAFS spectrum, range, and step of the monochromator scan angle. The angle step is set to correspond to the energy step of the XANES region and transformed to the sampling time by the operation software.
The monochromator scan speed is in most systems constant, other than in the acceleration and deceleration periods. In most cases, the amplitude of the EXAFS oscillation is smaller in the higher k-region. Thus, the step scan XAFS measurements are usually conducted with a longer measurement time in the higher k-region to obtain spectra having a better signal to noise ratio. The raw QXAFS data is usually resampled at the points corresponding to constant interval of k, i.e., 0.5 nm -1 , by averaging the data between adjacent sampling points as shown in Fig. 7.2. The averaging data number, N ave , depends on the k-range. From the relationship of
, where E e is the photoelectron energy, N ave is roughly estimated to be proportional to k, which indicates that the resampled data quality is higher in the higher k-range.
Further, a time-efficient QXAFS method was developed to measure higher quality spectra up to high-k regions in the shortest possible time [2]. This method involves sweeping the monochromator continuously at a variable angular speed depending on the k-region. Actually, users can divide an XAFS measurement region into several blocks and set a sweep speed for each block. Figure 7.2 shows the improved quality of the EXAFS spectra in the high k-region using the timeefficient QXAFS method.

Characteristics of QXAFS
In this section, the main characteristics of QXAFS are described and compared with those of DXAFS. First, QXAFS can be conducted in the same mode as those available in step scan XAFS, e.g., transmission mode, fluorescence mode, total conversion electron yield mode, and reflection mode. Thus, QXAFS can be adapted for all samples measured by step scan XAFS, including dilute samples and thin films. Second, QXAFS can be adapted for spatially inhomogeneous samples and samples surrounded by highly scattering materials such as fuel cells as shown in Fig. 7.3 and batteries. Third, QXAFS can provide spectra having a higher energy resolution (Fig. 7.4), higher quality (especially in the EXAFS region), and higher kregion data in the low energy region than DXAFS spectra. Fourth, the temporalspatial-resolved XAFS measurement can be conducted using two-dimensional imaging detectors or a micro-and nano-focused beam. Fifth, it is possible to combine XAFS measurement with SR X-ray-based techniques (XRD, SAXS, etc.) and measure the same part in a sample. These superior qualities of the QXAFS method are advantageous in a practical sense for measuring actual samples under various operational conditions.
The time resolution of QXAFS is determined by factors related to hardware, such as scan speed of the monochromator and response time of the detectors and measurement systems, and factors related to the samples themselves, such as the time needed to measure spectra with a high enough quality for the XAFS analysis and to stimulate the reaction of the sample, such as gas diffusion.
However, QXAFS does have some disadvantages compared with DXAFS: specifically, a minimum time resolution and the absorbance at each energy point in one spectrum depending on the measurement time.

X-ray Optics at Bending Magnet and Wiggler Beamlines
At the bending magnet or wiggler beamlines, QXAFS measurements are conducted with the time resolution from seconds to minutes depending on the photon flux. In many beamlines, fixed-exit DCM is used for both the QXAFS and step scan XAFS measurements. The first crystal of the DCM is cooled with water or liquid nitrogen to withstand heat load. There are two types of DCM based on the control method.
The first involves conducting a quick scan in keeping with a fixed-exit condition. To achieve a fixed-exit beam, the DCM needs to continuously control the rotation motion of both crystals and the translation motion of the first or second crystal. Mechanical link type DCMs have been developed to achieve this, where the rotation and translation motions are driven using a single motor. A technical challenge of the mechanical link DCM is how to keep the parallelism between both crystals during the translation motion of the first or second crystal. A number of different schemes have been developed to address this. These DCMs consist of a single rotational stage for mounting the double crystals and a translation stage for the first or second crystal.
In the other type of DCM method, a quick scan is performed without a fixed-exit condition. In this case, the QXAFS measurements are realized by rotating a pair of DCM crystals without translation motion of the first or second crystal, similar to a channel-cut crystal. The simply designed DCM for the step scan XAFS can be used here. Prior to the QXAFS measurement, the parallelism between both crystals is adjusted by measuring the rocking curve at the center energy of the QXAFS, which enables the stability of the beam flux. The height of the exit beam from the monochromator changes during the QXAFS scan. The downstream vertically focusing mirror, however, can keep the beam height at the sample (focal point) (see Fig. 7.5a). A simple cylindrically bent mirror can usually be used instead of the ideal parabolic mirror with good approximation due to the large radius of curvature. The length of the downstream focusing mirror has to be long enough to reflect the incident beam in spite of its height change. In the case of the standard DCM at SPring-8, offset between the incident and exit beam is 30 mm to stop high energy radiation from source by separating from monochromatized X-rays. The change of the exit beam is 2.2 mm during Ca K-edge XAFS scanning from 4 to 5.5 keV. Figure 7.5b shows that the beam height change at the sample is less than 20 μm with and without translation motion of the first crystal of the DCM [2]. Slightly larger beam height fluctuation during quick scanning was due to the slope error from the ideal surface at the off-center part of the downstream focusing mirror.

Undulator Beamline and Optics
The undulator source enables higher time resolution of the QXAFS due to a higher photon flux on the sample. The energy width of the first harmonic of the undulator is 2-3 %, which corresponds to about 200-300 eV at 10 keV. This is enough for the XANES measurements but unfortunately does not seem to be enough for the EXAFS measurements. There are two ways to conduct the QEXAFS measurement, depending on the undulator gap operation. One is synchronized continuous scans of the undulator gap and the DCM [3,4]. This method ensures maximum photon flux from the undulator at each measurement energy point. However, the time resolution is limited by the scan speed of the undulator gap, which is more than several seconds for a QEXAFS scan over an energy range typically between À300 and 1500 eV above the absorption edge.
The other method is conducted with a fixed gap undulator that is either tapered or non-tapered (see Sects. 3.1-3.3). The tapered undulator increases the energy width of the harmonics by varying the taper ratio of the undulator gap. Figure 7.6 shows the spectral fluxes of the fundamental harmonic measured on the X-ray beam axis calculated using a synchrotron radiation calculation code SPECTRA [5] for two different taper ratios at the standard tapered undulator at SPring-8. The measured Changes in beam height of sample during scanning with (red) and without translation of first crystal (blue) around 4 keV measured using position sensitive proportional counter [2] energy widths were 600 and 1700 eV, which are suitable for the XANES and EXAFS measurements, respectively.
A faster QXAFS measurement system is realized by coupling the tapered undulator with a channel-cut monochromator system. Frahm et al. developed the QEXAFS monochromators based on a cam-driven tilt table for rapid angular oscillations between 0 and 3 mounted on a goniometer which defines the mean energy of the QXAFS spectrum [6,7]. This monochromator uses a cryogenically cooled channel-cut monochromator system to withstand the high heat load and has achieved a time resolution of 12.5 ms. This type of monochromator is widely installed around the world, such as the SuperXAS beamline at SLS, SAMBA at SOLEIL, and X18B at NSLS.
The low divergent undulator radiation enables channel-cut crystal to be compact, which allows for faster angular oscillation. Figure 7.7a shows the interior of the QEXAFS monochromators using a direct-drive servo motor for angular oscillation  [8] with the liquid-nitrogen cooled compact channel-cut crystal developed by Nonaka et al. at BL33XU in SPring-8 [8]. A schematic of the crystal is shown in Fig. 7.7b. The gap between the reflecting planes is 3 mm, which offsets the beam height by about 6 mm. This design enables the crystal to be downsized to 70 Â 70 Â 70 mm 3 . The crystal shape was designed to allow double-bounce Bragg reflection over an angular range of 4 -30 . This monochromator achieved a time resolution of 10 ms for the QEXAFS measurement. In this beamline, the double mirrors are placed apart at a distance of 10 m with a glancing angle of 1.5 mrad to separate reflected X-rays by 30 mm in the horizontal direction from high energy radiation. This configuration enables the rejection of the high energy components by a gammaray stopper. This type of monochromator and beamline arrangement has been installed at BL28XU and BL36XU at SPring-8.
QXAFS with a milliseconds time resolution was realized by using even faster monochromators. One is the piezo-driven double-crystal monochromator developed by Frahm et al. [9]. The monochromator crystals are mounted on piezo-driven tilt tables that can change the Bragg angle in an oscillatory manner with frequencies of more than 100 Hz within a narrow angular width, such as 0.13 . This system allows QXANES measurement with a time resolution of several ms.
The other monochromator consists of the channel-cut crystal having a very small inertia. This monochromator was first developed for the helical undulator in BL40XU at SPring-8 which has a non-tapered gap and gives a high flux but low power quasimonochromatic X-ray beam [10,11]. This undulator generates on-axis fundamental radiation in the energy range from 8 to 17 keV. The total power was reduced to 7 to 15 W by eliminating off-axis higher harmonics in the front end without significant loss of the fundamental radiation. Low heat load radiation allowed the monochromator to be substantially downsized to 27 Â 13 Â 14 mm 3 and the cooling devices to be removed [12]. The inertia of the monochromator crystal was about 10 gcm 2 . This compact crystal can be repeatedly oscillated at a Bragg angle with a maximum 250 Hz in the EXAFS range at around 12 keV using a galvano scanner motor (Fig. 7.8). The helical undulator is not a tapered one and so the energy bandwidth of the fundamental radiation is 1.5-2.5 %, which is similar to that of the standard horizontal undulator. Such an incident beam profile of the helical undulator can be used for QEXAFS measurements by setting the peak of the Fig. 7.8 Galvano scanner motor-driven monochromator (a) and schematic of channel-cut Si crystal (b) [12] fundamental radiation to the target energy region, such as the energy corresponding to around maximum k, because the EXAFS spectrum in the high k region requires a high incident photon flux. Figure 7.9 shows a QXAFS spectrum around the Pt-L 3 edge (11.6 keV) of Pt foil in the transmission mode together with the incident beam intensity. The first fundamental peak energy was set at 12.5 keV to measure data with a high S/N ratio up to k ¼ 150 nm À1 . The intensity of the incident beam gently decreased toward the lower energy region but was still higher than that of the bending magnet source in SPring-8.
The galvano scanner motor driven monochromator with no cooling device can also be used for the tapered undulator radiation under certain conditions [13]. Calculation by the code SPECTRA [5] showed that the heat load of the undulator radiation on the monochromator crystal can be reduced to less than 5 W by rejecting higher harmonics and low energy parts using the mirrors and an absorber, respectively, and by limiting incident beam size using the front end slit. This heat load is acceptable for maintaining the Bragg condition of the crystal. This system results in fast quick XAFS measurements but causes a loss of beam flux-about 10 to 70 %, depending on the energy. Nonetheless, a photon flux of more than 10 12 photons/s is available at the sample. Figure 7.10 shows the time-resolved QXANES spectra Fig. 7.9 QXAFS spectrum around Pt-L 3 edge of Pt foil in transmission mode (red) and incident beam intensity of helical undulator at BL40XU at SPring-8 (blue) [12] Fig. 7.10 QXAFS spectra around Pt-L 3 edge of Pt/C catalyst (Pt loading: 0.5 mg/cm 2 ) in PEFC in transmission mode measured using galvano scanner motor-driven monochromator [14] around the Pt-L 3 edge of the Pt/C catalyst in the PEFC for a voltage cycling process in the transmission mode with a time resolution of 2 ms [14].
It should be noted that the tapered undulator radiation has a spatial distribution that changes with the energy (Fig. 7.11). Some artifacts may occur in the XAFS spectrum in the case of measuring inhomogeneous samples using an unfocused beam, so in the QXAFS measurement using the tapered undulator radiation, the sample is required to have uniformity in an area larger than the X-ray beam size [15].

Detectors
Almost all X-ray measurement devices used in step scan XAFS can be applied for the QXAFS measurement, but some of them have been improved so as to achieve the faster response required from the high time resolution.
For the transmission mode fast QXAFS measurement with the time resolution of less than 1 s, fast response ionization chambers have been developed. One of these, a gridded ionization chamber, suppresses the slow ionic component of the ionization current by placing a metal grid between the electrodes and keeping it at an appropriate electric potential [16]. Only the fast electrons are able to pass the grid, which shortens the rise time of the chambers to less than 5.5 μs.
In fast fluorescence mode QXAFS measurements less than 1 s, a large area PIN-photodiode (PIN-PD) is used with an applied reverse bias voltage to achieve fast response on the order of micro seconds. It is noted in selecting the PIN-PD model that the larger area PIN-PD has a higher dark current and slower rise time. The Lytle-type detector (EXAFS Co.) is a large area fluorescence detector conventionally used in step scan XAFS. As it has a response time of sub-seconds, it has been used for slow QXAFS measurements with a time resolution of more than minutes. Recently, two dimensional pixel array detectors (PADs) such as PILA-TUS, EIGER (DECTRIS Ltd.), and Merlin (Quantum Detector Ltd.) are starting to be applied. These are hybrid single photon-counting type detectors with a large area and a fast readout time of sub-ms to ms. These features are very useful in terms of application to a high quality fluorescence mode QXAFS detector. They can be used for QXAFS with a time resolution of more than sub-seconds.
For the measurement of ultra-dilute samples or thin films, energy dispersive detectors such as Ge detectors or silicon drift detectors (SDDs) are applied. Multielement types are preferable for detection over a large area. The output voltage from the preamplifier of the detectors is amplified, digitalized, and stored in memory by a digital X-ray processor system. These measurement systems have a maximum photon count rate, such as 1 MHz (Ge detector) or 3 MHz (SDD) per element, which restricts time resolution to more than 1 s for the QEXAFS measurement. Figure 7.12 shows the Ge K-edge XANES spectra of Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 thin film measured over 45 s at the bending magnet beamline BL01B1 at SPring-8 [2].

Measurement Systems
Both an ionization chamber and PIN-PD are required to measure very small electric currents with a high speed and high accuracy, which makes such electric measurements quite difficult. The output current of these detectors is amplified to voltage by current amplifiers. The voltage signals are then digitalized and saved to a PC. Two types of system are used for digitalizing voltage signals. One is a set consisting of a voltage-to-frequency converter (VFC) and a frequency counter. This system sums the analog voltage signals measured over a time interval between start and stop trigger, which improves the spectral quality by increasing the statistical accuracy Fig. 7.12 Ge K-edge XANES spectra of Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 thin film measured over 45 s under fluorescence mode using 19-element Ge detector at BM beamline BL01B1 at SPring-8 [2] and reducing random electrical noise. The other system is a set consisting of a lowpass filter (LPF) and analog-to-digital converter (ADC) (Fig. 7.1). The highfrequency electrical noise included in the output voltages is rejected by the front end LPF prior to the ADC. With the LPF, it is difficult to maintain high quality operation under a low-frequency (slow scan) measurement mode such as <0.1 Hz. The VFC counter system is superior to the LPF-ADC system in terms of the data quality in long time scale measurement such as >10 s. Thus, the VFC counter system is also conventionally used for the step scan XAFS measurement.
However, the VFC counter system has a limitation for highly time-resolved measurements due to the maximum frequency of the VFC. The counter rounds frequency output from the VFC to an integer, and the number of counts (not the number of photons) is require to be on the order of 10 3 and 10 6 for the quality analysis of XANES and EXAFS up to k ¼ 100 nm À1 , respectively. The maximum frequency of the now commercially available VFC is 100 MHz. In the QEXAFS measurement, the number of data points is typically about 5000. In the case of QXAFS measurement with the time resolution of 1 s, the data sampling time is 200 μs, so the maximum number of counts at each sampling point is 20,000 using the 100 MHz VFC. After averaging the data process, the estimated maximum count number around k ¼ 100 nm À1 (typical N ave is 10) is on the order of 10 5 , which is not enough for EXAFS analysis. The VFC counter system is therefore not suitable for measurements with high time resolution (typically < 1 s).
Electrical noise is a critical issue in determining the spectral quality and should be reduced as much as possible. The grounding wires of measurement systems should be connected to a single point ground in the stabilized power supply. The outputs from devices other than detectors should be electrically separated from the ADC using an isolation module. The signal cables between the detector and current amplifier should be low noise type and as short as possible. It is important to use a low-noise high-resolution type ADC and a low-noise fast-response type current amplifier.

Spatiotemporally Resolved QXAFS
The spatiotemporally resolved QXAFS is a powerful tool for investigating the dynamic aspect of structures and electronic states of spatially heterogeneous samples during the chemical reaction. There are two types of two-dimensional (2D) spatiotemporally resolved QXAFS methods: microprobe QXAFS and a 2D full-field imaging QXAFS.
The microprobe QXAFS method uses micro-and nano-beams. Reflective focusing optics such as the Kirkpatrick-Baez (KB) mirror and capillary are commonly applied for QXAFS measurement since they have no chromatic aberration (see Sect. 10.1). The spatial resolution of the measurement is decided by the focused beam size, which can be less than 100 nm if using the KB mirror. In this method, the X-ray fluorescence mapping (XRF) is first measured to specify the distribution of the element and frame structure. Then, the QXAFS measurements are conducted on specific positions in the sample. The microprobe QXAFS method is difficult to apply for the point-by-point measurement of the transient reaction, and the quality of the XAFS spectra is significantly affected by the shift in the position irradiated by X-ray beams due to vibration and/or thermal drift in the focusing devices and sample stages during XAFS measurements. This is more serious when carrying out measurements with smaller X-ray beams. Therefore, the microprobe QXAFS measurements at fixed points require high stability on the devices concerning the focused beam position.
Full-field QXAFS methods are generally more effective for site-dependent studies than point-by-point microprobe methods since the former can be conducted with almost no time lag when different sites are measured, which, however, can be used only for the transmission mode measurement. 2D full-field imaging QXAFS measurements are conducted using a 2D imaging detector such as PADs and indirect conversion method X-ray image detectors [17,18]. The latter is composed of a visible light conversion unit, which converts the incident X-rays into visible light by a scintillator, and a CCD or CMOS camera. The spatial resolution is defined by that of the imaging detector. The detector is selected to suit the spatial resolution and field of view required in each experiment. The pixel size and detection area of the PADs, such as EIGER and PILATUS, are from 50 Â 50 to 170 Â 170 μm 2 and several of tens cm 2 , which is suitable for measuring areas larger than several millimeters using the large profile beam of the bending magnet radiation. The maximum count rate of the PADs ranges from 10 5 to 10 6 photons/pixel/s. The X-ray flux incident to each pixel of the PAD is 10 7 to 10 8 photons/pixel/s in the case of bending magnet beamline BL01B1 at SPring-8. This means the photon flux rate needs to be reduced to 10 2 times in order to be adjusted to the maximum counting rate of the PAD using an attenuator. The maximum frame rate of the PADs is 100-1000 Hz, so the minimum time resolution of the QXANES and QEXAFS is about 1 s and 100 s, respectively.
The minimum spatial resolution and field of view of the indirect conversion method X-ray image detectors is a few μm and several-hundred μm, and the monochromatized undulator beam flux is detectable without attenuation. This enables the measurement of one XAFS spectrum less than 1 s using this detector coupled with a high-speed CMOS sensor camera with a frame rate of more than 10 kHz and the focused beam from the tapered undulator. The actual time resolution, however, is limited by the spectral quality required for the analysis.
The incident beam profile is usually approximated by the average of that measured before and after the QXAFS measurement at each energy point. Thus, this method requires high reproducibility on the incident beam profile by achieving high stabilities on the SR light source and X-ray optics, especially the monochromator.
Most of 2D spatial-resolved QXAFS techniques have been applied for the static experiments. 2D spatiotemporally resolved QXAFS studies have just begun.

Combined Methods of QXAFS
The simultaneous time-resolved method is a very useful and practical technique that enables probing the same part of the sample by complementary techniques and provides a detailed understanding of the dynamical chemical processes. This method gives more precise information than separately conducted measurements since the time-resolved experiments of the transient reactions might be generally difficult to reproduce exactly. So far, QXAFS has been combined with timeresolved SR X-ray-based methods such as X-ray diffraction [19], small angle X-ray scattering and wide angle X-ray scattering [20] and with non-X-ray-based methods such as IR, VIS, UV, and Raman. The combined method uses specially designed operand cells and setups of the sample cell and detectors. However, it is difficult to conduct fully simultaneous SR X-ray-based and QXAFS measurements since SR X-ray-based methods other than XAFS usually use a constant energy. The QXAFS and SR X-ray-based measurements are therefore conducted alternately by controlling the Bragg angle of the monochromator.
It is possible to conduct non-X-ray-based measurements at the same time as QXAFS measurements. However, there is a difference in probing depth between the X-ray and non-X-ray light.

Outlook
In this section, QXAFS and related techniques were described from the point of view of instrumentation.
The minimum time resolution of QXAFS is about one millisecond at present, which is limited by both monochromator scan speed and the response time of the ionization chamber. The performance of the present monochromator and ionization chamber seems to be close to the limit. To achieve higher time resolution, the development of a new technical principle for the monochromator and detector may be required. Also, a faster and more efficient fluorescence X-ray detector is expected to be developed for the measurement of dilute samples or thin films.
Not so much research has been conducted using fast QXAFS measurements with the time resolution of less than a hundred milliseconds so far. The reason for this is not only the poor spectral quality stemming mainly from the X-ray flux but also the fact that it is not easy to construct the reaction cell included in the stimulation system for the actual samples with this time scale. It is expected that QXAFS investigation of fast chemical reactions will be driven by the development of a dedicated reaction cell.
Time-resolved imaging techniques will be key for the investigation of the dynamic aspect of the actual heterogeneous chemical reaction. 2D spatiotemporally resolved QXAFS studies have just begun, and applications are expected to increase in various research fields. Recently, a 3D spatial-resolved XAFS method with a resolution of several tens of nm has been applied under ex situ conditions. 3D spatiotemporally resolved XAFS is expected to be realized as a result of such technology developments.
The method combined with QXAFS is expected to further spread to SR X-raybased techniques such as X-ray computed tomography, resonant inelastic X-ray scattering, and X-ray emission spectroscopy.

Chapter 8
Energy Dispersive XAS Sakura Pascarelli and Olivier Mathon

Introduction
This chapter presents an overview of energy dispersive X-ray absorption spectroscopy (EDXAS), as developed and used at synchrotron radiation sources. It mainly covers time resolved studies, with emphasis on technical aspects.
In EDXAS, a curved crystal disperses and focuses a polychromatic X-ray beam onto the sample (Fig. 8.1). This crystal is named a polychromator, by analogy with the monochromators used on the energy scanning spectrometers. The Bragg angle of incidence varies continuously from one side of the crystal to the other.
Consequently, the energy of the X-ray beam diffracted by the crystal varies also continuously from one side of the crystal to the other, introducing a correlation between the X-ray beam propagation direction and its energy. The beam transmitted by the sample is then detected by a position sensitive detector, where the energy-direction correlation introduced by the polychromator is transformed into an energy-position correlation. To measure a XAS spectrum, the incident and transmitted intensities as a function of photon energy I 0 (E) and I 1 (E) are obtained from the spatial distribution of photons on the detector without and with the sample respectively. All energy points of the absorption spectrum are acquired in parallel. Due to the parallel acquisition scheme, an EDXAS spectrometer operates intrinsically in a time resolved manner. The time resolution is ultimately defined by the performance of the detector (minimum exposure time and maximum frame rate) and the characteristics of the X-ray source (number of photons per detector pixel).
Besides the acquisition speed, another major advantage of EDXAS is its intrinsic stability, because during acquisition there are no moving components. This leads to a reduction of systematic noise and to high stability of the energy scale and focal S. Pascarelli (*) • O. Mathon European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, 38000 Grenoble, France e-mail: sakura@esrf.fr spot position. The combination of speed and stability has led to unprecedented sensitivity in the detection of atomic displacements through measurements in differential mode [2]. If a high brilliance source is utilized, focal spots of the order of a few microns can be achieved [3], and EDXAS becomes an ideal playground for high pressure investigations [4] or hyperspectral mapping on heterogeneous samples [5]. EDXAS has also been applied as a chemical and orbital selective probe of magnetism [6,7]. This chapter focuses on the time-resolved applications of EDXAS. It is structured as follows. Section 8.2 outlines the historical development of this technique and gives an overview of the existing facilities worldwide. It then compares the dispersive vs the scanning spectrometer for time resolved XAS applications. Section 8.3 discusses the working principle of the energy dispersive XAS spectrometer, it introduces the equations for the evaluation of energy bandpass and resolution and discusses the limitations on the focal spot. Section 8.4 reports examples of applications of EDXAS in different time resolution domains, with emphasis on acquisition methods and detection systems. The fast and parallel acquisition of the full XAS, with short exposure time and short deadtime between consecutive exposures makes EDXAS very attractive for its ability to "film" the time evolution of a dynamic process. EDXAS was developed in the early 80s to track the evolution of the local and electronic structure of the absorber during a chemical reaction in real time (Sect. 8.4.1). In more recent years, this real-time capability has also shown great potential to probe matter in thermodynamical conditions that are so extreme that they can be produced only for short periods of time (Sect. 8.4.2). Finally, thanks to advances in detector technology, today exposure time has decreased to levels that enable the selection of a single X-ray pulse (from a single electron bunch in the ring), and EDXAS has recently been exploited to probe nanosecond-lived excited states of matter using a single shot acquisition (Sect. 8.4.3). 8.2 Energy Dispersive X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy

Historical Development of EDXAS and Overview of Existing Facilities
Synchrotrons all over the world have invested in EDXAS spectrometers in the past 40 years. Starting from the synchrotron pioneering work in the early 80s [1], this technique has spread to many other synchrotron sources worldwide. The first EDXAS beamlines were built in Japan [8], France [9], Germany [10] and UK [11,12]. EDXAS beamlines are now operational in Brazil (LNLS), India (Indus II), France (ESRF and SOLEIL), Japan (PF-AR and SPring8), Thailand (SLRI), and soon in UK (DLS) and China (SSRF). Table 8.1 below presents an overview of the existing EDXAS facilities, together with source type and principal characteristics of the spectrometer. In order to obtain a polychromatic fan with a sufficient energy bandwidth to cover a full EXAFS spectrum, a source with a large horizontal divergence (bending magnet or wiggler) is generally chosen. This is the case for all existing EDXAS beamlines, except for the NW2A beamline at PF-AR and the EDXAS beamline of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) ID24. The future D-line of SSRF, Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility, is foreseen to be built also on an undulator source. The first EDXAS beamline built on a third generation undulator source [13] features an original optical scheme where the large divergence is created using a strongly focusing mirror. This mirror not only creates a sufficiently large divergence that undulator sources do not have, but also creates a secondary source allowing the production of a micron sized focal spot [14]. This scheme allows obtaining 10 13 -10 14 photons per second on the sample in the whole EDXAS bandwidth, leading to an ultimate time resolution in the order of 1 μs for a single measurement, together with a μm scale focal spot size.

Dispersive Versus Scanning Spectrometer for Time Resolved Experiments
The main advantages of EDXAS spectrometers with respect to energy scanning spectrometers are: (1) the speed of acquisition, since all energy points are acquired in parallel on the position sensitive detector, (2) a small focal spot size together with a high flux, and (3) the stability of the energy scale and focal spot position, since there are no moving components during acquisition. There are two main limitations that are intrinsic to EDXAS. The first one is related to the need to maintain the energy-direction correlation created by the polychromator throughout the whole path from the crystal to the detector. This poses severe constraints on the morphology and microstructure of the sample: systems which produce strong small angle scattering are not suited for EDXAS (see for example Ref. [24]). The second is due to the fact that detection using de-excitation processes (fluorescence, total electron yield, etc.) is not possible, since all energies impinge on the sample simultaneously.
In addition to these fundamental limitations, the EXAFS k-range is limited at low energies because the energy bandwidth of the polychromatic fan scales with the cotangent of the Bragg angle (see Eq. 8.1). Finally, the fact that in general the incident and transmitted intensity (I 0 and I 1 ) are not measured simultaneously may represent a drawback, especially in case of incident intensity fluctuations with time (X-ray beam instabilities). By giving up the parallel detection over the full energy range and using a sequential acquisition mode [24], the energy dispersive spectrometer has demonstrated its capacity for fast-time resolved XAS studies in fluorescence mode [25].
The limitations mentioned above have certainly played a role in the development of EDXAS, and although this technique has spread quite rapidly, the EDXAS user community remains a minor portion of the global XAS user community. In addition to these intrinsic limitations, the technical challenges to build and use an EDXAS spectrometer are important: for example dealing with stability issues, designing efficient polychromator crystals and benders, or developing dedicated detectors.
In the domain of dynamical studies, EDXAS beamlines have been historically used for applications dealing with homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis [26]. The typical timescales of this kind of experiments ranges from minutes down to the ms. With the development of fast energy scanning spectrometers (QEXAFS) [27], the tens of ms timescale are now accessible to scanning spectrometers. In addition, these experiments often deal with small absorber concentrations (roughly < 1 % wt) and can then benefit from the fluorescence detection mode on scanning spectrometers. Therefore, the interest of using EDXAS spectrometers on these timescales has decreased.
Dynamical processes on timescales faster than the 10 ms range can be investigated with scanning spectrometers by using pump and probe techniques, where the time evolution of the absorption at a single energy is recorded. But an EDXAS spectrometer can follow the process in "film" mode, i.e., with complete XAS spectra continuously recorded one after the other as the dynamical process evolves in time. If combined to a high flux source, an EDXAS spectrometer allows to obtain a sufficient signal to noise ratio in a single "film". This is particularly important for experiments that cannot be cycled indefinitely [28] or where the sample is destroyed after the run [29]. An EDXAS spectrometer can also operate in pump-and-probe mode. Again, the technique is particularly suited to single shot experiments where the sample is lost at the end of the run or/and when the dynamical process varies from shot to shot [30].

The Energy Dispersive Spectrometer
The energy dispersive spectrometer employs a curved crystal to focus and disperse a polychromatic fan of X-rays onto the sample position, introducing a correlation between the photon energy and the direction of propagation (see Fig. 8.2). The beam transmitted by the sample is detected by a position sensitive detector positioned at the end of the 2θ spectrometer arm where energy is correlated to position. The crystal is curved to an elliptical shape. The radius R of the closest circle is given by: 1=p þ 1=q ¼ 2=R sin θ 0 where p, q, and θ 0 are respectively the source-crystal and crystal-sample distances and central Bragg angle. In Fig. 8.2, L is the horizontal dimensions of the beam intercepted by the polychromator, and L/ sin θ 0 is the footprint of the beam on the crystal surface.
This Section introduces the basic equations for the evaluation of energy bandpass and energy resolution and discusses the limitations on the focal spot of an EDXAS spectrometer. Beamline ID24 at the ESRF is used as an illustrative example.

Energy Bandwidth
The full spectral range diffracted by the crystal ΔE is proportional to the variation of Bragg angle θ along the beam footprint on the crystal, Δθ: where E 0 is the central energy. Δθ can be calculated from p, q, and L as follows:
2) is valid as long as L/sinθ is smaller than the useful length of the polychromator crystal. In general, EDXAS spectrometers are installed on synchrotron sources having a large horizontal divergence, which easily provides a large beam footprint on the surface of the crystal to provide a sufficiently large energy bandwidth ΔE to cover a full EXAFS spectrum in a single shot. Equation (8.1) highlights an additional important limitation of EDXAS: at low energies, the full spectral range diffracted by the polychromator ΔE is strongly reduced due to the cotθ factor. This is illustrated in Fig. 8.3, which shows typical ΔE vs E 0 values for different q values obtained on ID24, using a Si(1 1 1) polychromator placed at p ¼ 30 m from the source. For a fixed choice of E 0 , ΔE strongly depends on the polychromator-sample distance q. At low energies (E < 7 keV), the k-range of the EXAFS is strongly reduced.

Energy Resolution
The energy resolution of an energy dispersive spectrometer depends on the central energy, E 0 , the crystal diffracting planes (h, k, l), the focusing distance q and detector position d. A simple expression δE/E for can be derived from Bragg's law:
¼ δθ cot θ 0 ; ð8:3Þ where δθ is the overall "monochromatic" angular spread. For a polychromator in Bragg geometry (i.e., the incident and the diffracted beam propagate on the same side of the crystal), δθ includes contributions from several factors: the spatial resolution of the detector δθ 1 , the size of the X-ray source δθ 2 , and the Darwin width of the curved polychromator crystal δθ 3 :
ð8:4Þ
The Darwin width spread due to the crystal curvature is included in δθ 3 .
The incident beam intercepts Bragg planes with a continuously different angle when it penetrates the crystal leading to an asymmetrical reflectivity profile of the highly curved Bragg-type crystal [31]. The effect can be simulated [32] and is illustrated in Fig. 8.4. This has severe consequences: a degradation of the energy resolution and an asymmetrical shape of the focal spot. This contribution increases with energy and with crystal curvature. It is small at 7 keV and becomes dominant at 18 keV for a Si(1 1 1) crystal. This is the fundamental limitation of the Bragg geometry in the achievement of small focal spots and high energy resolution at high energies (E > 13 keV). As an illustration, we report in Figs. 8.5 and 8.6 the angular contributions δθ i and the energy resolution δE/E respectively, calculated for ID24 in the case of a Bragg Si(1 1 1) crystal focusing at q ¼ 0.7 m with a detector at d ¼ 3.3 m.
These figures show that the main contributions derive from δθ 3 . In particular, Fig. 8.5 shows the increase of the spread of the Darwin width with energy, while Fig. 8.6 illustrates that for energies larger than 15 keV, the energy resolution of the bent Bragg crystal exceeds the K-edge core-hole lifetime contribution. This effect, together with the geometric reduction in horizontal acceptance of the crystal at low Bragg angles, limits the use of the Bragg geometry to the range 5-13 keV approximately. For this reason, polychromators in the Laue geometry (i.e., the incident and the diffracted beam propagate on opposite sides of the crystal) have been developed for high energy applications of EDXAS [31]. In the bent symmetric Laue case, the deformation induced by bending is orthogonal to the reciprocal lattice. The case can be treated as an unbent crystal and, contrary to the Bragg case, there is no broadening of the Darwin width whatever the bending radius is. Consequences are that there is no broadening of the focal spot size nor a loss in energy resolution at high energy, but an additional δθ term is required in Eq. (8.4) to take into account the spread of the monochromatic beam on the detector due to the Borrmann fan.

Focusing Properties
Focusing using bent Bragg planes cannot be described in the same way as focusing with total reflection optical elements. Due to X-ray beam penetration into the crystal, there are two effects that affect focusing. The first one is due to the variation of Bragg angle as a function of penetration depth, due to the bent shape of the crystal (see Fig. 8.4). The second effect is due to Bragg diffraction. In Bragg diffraction conditions, a crystal (bent or flat), has a natural angular acceptance (Darwin width) ω D when highlighted by a monochromatic divergent beam. This leads to a monochromatic diffracted beam with a natural divergence Δθ ¼ 2ω D . Due to the focusing diffraction limit, such a beam leads to an intrinsic transverse focal spot size Δx of:
if the diffraction profile is approximated by a rectangle. At 7 keV for a Si(1 1 1) crystal the intrinsic dynamical contribution to the focal spot size is Δx ~2 μm. This result has been confirmed by dynamical theory simulations of the Bragg bender case [33] as shown in Fig. 8.7.
For a polychromatic incident beam, the final spot size is the result of the sum of all monochromatic contributions. Therefore focusing a polychromatic incident divergent beam with a bent crystal leads to an intrinsic spot size limit of the order of 2 μm FWHM in the Bragg geometry. Another limiting factor to the spot size is the slope error of the Bragg polychromator crystal. The difficulties here are related to the manufacture of large Si crystals, the thickness of which needs to remain constant to within a few microns along the full length. The protocol for the manufacture of such crystals is constantly being improved, but it is still very difficult to achieve the desired shape over the full footprint of the beam on the polychromator. The consequences are that focal spot sizes will in general be dependent on the portion of the polychromatic fan (or on the portion of the illuminated footprint on the crystal) that is selected. On ID24, at the Fe K-edge and at q ~0.75 m, the focal spot achieved is ~4 Â 4 μm 2 FWHM with an selected energy range of ΔE sel ~500 eV, although the full spectral range diffracted by the polychromator in this geometry is ΔE ~800 eV (from Eq. 8.1). The accuracy of the crystal bending and therefore the bender and crystal preparation technology is a key point of the EDXAS spectrometer.  34]. One limiting factor of such a device is the decay time of the scintillator screen. A compromise needs to be found between the three main parameters characterizing a scintillator screen: X-ray conversion efficiency, the emission spectrum that should be coupled to the CCD characteristics and the luminescence decay time. On ID24, a P43 (Gd 2 O 2 S:Tb) screen is generally used with decay time of 1.5 ms (100-10 %) and 3.2 ms (100-1 %). For the fastest applications, a P47 (100 ns, 100-10 %) screen can be adopted at the price of efficiency.
The first papers reporting on XAS studies of kinetics down to the ms timescale appeared at the XAFS conference in 1986 [8,35]. Since then, EDXAS has been applied in many fields of chemistry and catalysis to probe the evolution of local and electronic structure during kinetic processes, such as nanoparticle formation, catalytic processes and chemical reactions. A nice example of EDXAS in this field is reported in Ref. [36], where selective catalytic oxidation of benzene to phenol was investigated. Re L 3 EXAFS combined to Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations probed the catalytically active structure and the structural transformation and dynamics of new zeolite-supported interstitial-N/Re-clusters which were found to have impressive selectivities (as high as 94 % at 553 K) for this reaction. There are also many examples of in situ operando investigations of catalytic processes exploiting synchronous combined measurements of EDXAS with UV-vis/Infrared/ Raman/Mass spectrometry or X-ray diffraction [26]. The main difficulty of these experiments lies in the design of multi-technique compatible in situ cells that must reproduce the real catalytic operando conditions as closely as possible.

Down to the μs
Below the ms, fluorescent screen based CCD cameras start to be limited either by the maximum repetition rate of the detector or/and the decay time of the scintillator screen. To overcome these limitations, microstrip-based detector have been specifically developed for EDXAS ultra-fast X-ray spectroscopy studies. A first version based on a 1024 element Si microstrip chip combined with custom developed low noise, fast readout, electronics (XCHIP) [37] demonstrated minimum integration time down to the μs with 100 kHz repetition rate. At the same time, Si based devices have demonstrated a poor detection efficiency and a susceptibility to radiation damage under the high flux of third synchrotron generation sources, especially at high energy (above ~12 keV). This lead to the development of a second generation of microstrip detectors for high energies (XH) based on a 1024 element germanium microstrip [38]. The XH detector has been designed to provide almost 100 % detection efficiency over the working range of 5-40 keV and immunity to radiation damage. At the same time, readout electronics was upgraded to provide an excellent system linearity (better than 0.1 %), minimum exposure time below 100 ns and higher readout performance (355 kHz frame rate). These values correspond to the ESRF X-ray time structure.
When integration time decreases down to few tens of microseconds, the natural X-ray time structure of synchrotron based sources cannot be neglected and a synchronization of the detection to the electron bunch (in general with the RF cavity) is mandatory. Figure 8.8 presents the intensity variations along one ring circumference in the ESRF 7/8 þ 1 filling mode [39], recorded with the XH detector using an integration time of 88 ns. As a consequence, the basic frequency to synchronize a detector, for the fastest applications, should be equal to one ring circumference, i.e., 2.8 μs at the ESRF (355 kHz).
In this range of timescales, between the ms and the μs, a dispersive spectrometer can be particularly suited to study matter under extreme conditions of pressure, temperature, and magnetic field. The interest is not directly linked to the dynamics 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0  of the experiment but rather to the capacity to create thermodynamical states that are metastable, difficult or very expensive to produce for longer periods or completely unreachable in static mode.
The dispersive spectrometer is of particular interest when the experiment is non-reversible, for example when the sample in destroyed at the end of the run (single shot experiment). This is especially true when the dispersive spectrometer is coupled with a high flux source like an undulator or a wiggler. The flux on the sample can then reach 10 14 photons per seconds in the energy bandwidth, leading to a flux of about 10 5 photons per pixel (per XAS point) and per μs. In theory, this flux is sufficient to obtain a good signal to noise ratio in the XAS spectrum in a single shot experiment. This possibility is illustrated by recent work on dynamic excitation of Fe towards the warm dense matter regime using ohmic ramps [29]. The dispersive spectrometer can play also an interesting role when the number of repetitions is limited due to the fatigue of one component, for example of a resistive coil in a pulsed high magnetic field experiment [28]. The lifetime of the coil (in number of shots before failure) decreases as field magnitude increases. Pulsed magnetic field experiments are possible on scanning spectrometers, but full XAS information at high fields is very expensive in terms of coil degradation due to the very large number of cycles required.
Figure 8.9 reports results from the investigation of a Mn spin-crossover compound, H3taa¼tris(1-(2-azolyl)-2-azabuten-4-yl)amine, [also named MnIII (taa)]. Such compounds have much potential for application in controllable magnetic devices. The figure shows magnetic field induced modifications of the Mn K-edge XANES recorded at T ¼ 29 K as a function of magnetic field up to 37 T. The magnet could generate pulsed fields up to 37 T for a duration of 1 ms. For each discharge process, twenty discrete spectra were acquired with exposures of 100 μs and dead time of 14.4 μs between them.
Fig. 8.9 Field-dependent Mn K-edge XANES spectra (left axis) and the difference spectra, ΔA H (right axis), at 29 K in magnetic fields of 0, 11, and 37 T. From Ref. [28] Finally, even if thermodynamical conditions can be reached in static mode, the unique combination of fast and parallel acquisition of the XAS spectrum together with a small focal spot is of high interest to probe samples subject to extreme conditions, and to check their stability in time. This is for example the case of investigations of matter at high pressures and temperatures, such as melts at conditions of Earth's interior [40].

Below the Microseconds
Below the μs it becomes necessary to work with a single X-ray bunch. The technique generally used is the pump-and-probe approach where the time resolution is defined by the delay between the pump (start) and the probe (stop). The time resolution is then limited either by the duration of the pump or by the duration of the probe. In practice, the time resolution is very often limited by the duration of the X-ray bunch, i.e., around 100 ps. The role of the detector in this mode is only to select the desired X-ray bunch and to reject the side bunches. The important parameter of the detector is consequently the minimum integration time. The XH, with a minimum integration time of about 80 ns, is perfectly suited for this kind of experiments. From a general point of view, the repetition rate of the experiment is limited by the repetition rate of the pump, for example, a laser operating at few tens of Hertz. Consequently, the request for the repetition rate of the detector is less demanding than in "film" mode. The principal disadvantage of the dispersive approach with respect to similar pump-probe applications using scanning spectrometers, is the restriction to a transmission geometry. However, this limitation is alleviated with highly stable X-ray sources, and thus the intrinsic gain by multiplexing the X-ray spectrum is still a very significant real-time gain in kinetic studies of structural changes. EDXAS in combination with a single 100 ps bunch has been used to take fast snapshots of the time evolution of photo-excited Cu based complexes [41], as illustrated in Fig. 8.10.
The additional value of using a dispersive spectrometer in such pump-and-probe method is highlighted again when the experiment is non-repeatable. For example, when the pump itself is not perfectly reproducible (i.e., the energy delivered by the laser is not constant shot to shot) or when the sample is damaged or destroyed at the end of each pump-and-probe cycle. It is then important to obtain a sufficiently good signal-to-noise ratio with a single X-ray bunch integration. At ESRF with the ID24 EDXAS spectrometer, in four bunch filling mode and coupled to four undulators, 20,000 ph./pixels/single X-ray bunch have been measured at 7 keV in the direct beam. This is sufficient to obtain clean XANES features in many cases. A recent experiment has shown that EXAFS measurements can be achieved on dynamically compressed Fe by means of a high power laser pulse (Fig. 8.11) [30].  Pump Probe XAFS Toshihiko Yokoyama and Yohei Uemura

Introduction
Changes of structure and chemical states of catalysts have been successfully observed with XAFS under reaction conditions. Nowadays, a XAFS spectrum can be obtained even within several milliseconds by using quick XAFS (QXAFS) and dispersive XAFS (DXAFS) techniques. However, much faster fundamental processes of catalysts should be also key phenomena to understanding catalytic reactions. For example, lifetimes of photocarriers, transfer processes and active sites of catalysis should govern the photocatalytic activity. In order to observe such fast events, the demanding time resolution of XAFS measurements is less than microseconds, which is much shorter than the time resolution of QXAFS and DXAFS techniques. A pump-probe XAFS technique is applicable if the processes can take place repeatedly. The pump-probe XAFS technique has been developed since 1980s [1]. Nowadays, the time range of phenomena observed by the pumpprobe XAFS technique is from sub-picoseconds to several hundreds of microseconds.

A Typical Pump-Probe XAFS System
X-rays coming from synchrotrons are short pulses with 100-ps time duration (or less than 100 ps). A pulse laser is employed to excite electronic states of samples and is synchronized with the X-ray pulses so that XAFS spectra of the excited states can be recorded with a 100-ps time resolution. As an example of the pump-probe XAFS system, a schematic setup at the beamline NW14A, Photon Factory Advanced Ring (PF-AR), Tsukuba, Japan is shown in Fig. 9.1a [2,3]. PF-AR is always operated in a single-bunch mode, where only one electron bunch circulates and the frequency of X-ray pulses is about 794 kHz. In order to synchronize the excitation laser with the X-ray pulses, the laser frequency (F) should be equal to be 794/N kHz, where N is the integer. For example, the excitation laser is set to about 945 Hz (¼794,000/840 Hz) in NW14A. X-ray absorption signals just after the laser excitation need to be gathered selectively in order to measure XAFS spectra of the excited state. The samples are kept dilute since the ratio of the excited state to the ground state in the samples can increase as the sample concentration gets lower. XAFS spectra of dilute samples are usually measured in a fluorescence mode. A photomultiplier tube (PMT) with a scintillator is often employed as a detector in the NW14A system. The output signal from the PMT decays very fast (within 10 ns). Each output signal can be seen as an isolated pulse shown in Fig. 9.1b. The output pulses in the certain period of time after the laser excitation are collected electrically. The rate of the signal acquisition is about 945 Hz. Boxcar integrators are equipped with the pumpprobe system in NW14A to obtain the PMT signals synchronized with the laser excitation.
Pump-probe XAFS systems in other synchrotron radiation facilities are similar as far as the laser frequency is much less than that of X-ray pulses. It is noted that the synchronization between X-ray pulses and the excitation laser should be taken into account on the measurements of incident X-ray intensity (I 0 ). Most of synchrotron radiation facilities are operated in a multi-bunch mode and each electron bunch gives a different X-ray intensity. The intensity of I 0 synchronized with the laser has to be also measured selectively in order to normalize X-ray absorption correctly. In such a case, fast detectors (PMT or an avalanche photodiode) and an electric gating system (boxcar integrator) should be employed for I 0 measurements. In contrast, slow detectors such as ionization chambers are available to measure I 0 in the facilities operated in the single-bunch mode as PF-AR.
The pump-probe XAFS technique is a very useful and powerful technique to understand the structure and the chemical state of excited species. However, it was difficult to obtain the data with a good S/N ratio enough to analyze EXAFS. Normally the excitation lasers for the pump-probe XAFS experiments were operated at about 1 kHz in order to make the laser fluence as large as possible. The photon flux of X-rays was poor at such a low repetition rate (the repetition rate from synchrotrons is usually 1 MHz or much more). It took much longer time to obtain reliable data than normal XAFS measurements. Recently, new pump-probe XAFS systems have been established at Advanced Light Source (APS), Chicago, USA [4] and Swiss Light Source (SLS), Villigen, Switzerland [5]. A high power and high repetition rate laser are employed in both the systems. The pump-probe experiments at more than hundreds kHz can provide high-quality spectra in a reasonable time as several hours. For example, the time for EXAFS measurements required with the high repetition system at APS [4] was 1/10 of the measurement time with a conventional 1-kHz repetition system.

Applications of the Pump-Probe XAFS Technique
There have been studies on photoexcited species in solvents observed by the pumpprobe XAFS technique and the recent results of the pump-probe XAFS experiments were reviewed [6,7]. Chen et al. observed the bond breaking and recovery processes of a Ni-phenylporphyrin complex dissolved in piperizine (Fig. 9.2) [8]. In the ground state, two piperizine molecules are bonded to the Ni atom that has an octahedral-coordination structure, which is denoted by NiTTP-L 2 while the Ni-phenylporphyrin complex denoted by NiTTP has a square-planner coordination without solvent. After the excitation by the pulse laser, the piperizine molecules leave the Ni atom. The chemical bond between piperizine and Ni is recovered during the relaxation process. Their experiments discovered that the recovery of the chemical bond took 28 ns. There were two kinds of the chemical bonds between Ni and N after the laser excitation. One bond is at 2.09 Å attributed to the unexcited NiTTP-L 2 molecules in the solvent. The other is at 1.92 Å and this value is identical to the bond length of NiTPP. The XANES spectra after the excitation were reproduced by the linear combination of the XANES of NiTPP-L 2 and NiTPP. Considering these results, no other species but the square-planner species exist after the excitation.
Recently, Uemura et al. reported the photoexcitation states of WO 3 observed by the pump-probe XAFS technique [9]. WO 3 is a popular photocatalyst and is active for oxidation of water. WO 3 can be excited to absorb light whose wavelength is less than 480 nm. Understanding the photoexcitation mechanism of WO 3 is important to develop more active photocatalysts using visible light. The valence band of WO 3 is mainly composed by O 2p orbitals and the conduction band of WO 3 by W 5d. If WO 3 absorbs light, electrons in the valence band are excited to the conduction band. In W L III -edge XANES the electron transition from W 2p to 5d appears as an intense dipole-allowed absorption often called a white line. The intensity of the white line is proportional to the vacancies of W 5d orbitals. It is expected that the intensity decreases while the excited electrons exist in the conduction band.
In Fig. 9.3, W L III XANES spectra of WO 3 before and after the excitation are shown. Distinct changes of the XANES spectra are found around 10,216 eV. The change can be seen as a negative peak in the difference spectrum at 150 ps after the excitation. The lifetime of the excitation state was estimated as 0.5(1) ns À1 from the decay of the XAFS intensity at 10,216 eV.

X-Ray Free Electron Laser
The time resolution of the pump-probe XAFS technique is typically 100 ps which is the pulse duration of the X-ray pulses from storage rings. Today, much shorter X-ray pulses can be obtained in X-ray Free Electron Lasers (XFEL). XFEL provides intense and coherent X-ray pulses whose duration is less than 50 fs. The intense and short X-ray pulses can give opportunities to access the dynamics of structure and electronic states of photoexcited species in a femtosecond timescale. The photoexcited state of Fe[bpy] 2+ was reported in the XFEL in USA (LCLS) [10]. Obara et al. [11] successfully observed the photoexcitation state of Fe(III) oxalic acid in SACLA, the XFEL facility in Japan. The pump-probe XAFS system at SACLA is shown in Fig. 9.4a. SACLA is a SASE-(Self Amplification of Spontaneous Emission) XFEL where every X-ray pulses coming from SACLA has different energy profile and special distribution. It is necessary to measure the intensities of incident and transmitted X-rays simultaneously in order to perform spectral normalization. They employed a transmission grating to split X-ray into two beams. The one beam is used for incident X-ray and the other is for transmitted X-ray. An elliptical mirror was employed to focus X-rays at the sample position. Difference spectra of Fe K-edge XANES after the laser excitation are shown in Fig. 9.4b. The electron transfer from the ligands (C 2 O 4 2À ) to Fe(III) was successfully observed by the pump-probe XAFS system in SACLA. The peak around 7.12 keV was attributed to the edge shift of Fe K-edge XAFS because Fe (III) was reduced to Fe(II) due to the electron transfer (The relaxation process of the excited state was not observed since the lifetime of Fe(II) species is very long which is more than several milliseconds [12].). The time resolution was less than 300 fs. The pump-probe XAFS technique in XFELs enables us to access dynamics of the structures and electronic states in a femtosecond timescale. The functions of solid materials are highly related to their structures, and the visualization of heterogeneous structures of solid materials is one of the interesting targets for XAFS analysis. Conventional XAFS measurement is performed by micron-size X-ray beams, and it can provide average structural information of a target sample in a beam spot. In the case of a powder sample, the information of local coordination is averaged for all powders with heterogeneous morphology, composition, surface structures, etc. in a beam spot of X-rays, and the local coordination of inhomogeneous assemblies cannot be separated by the conventional XAFS measurement.
Recently, the focusing techniques of X-ray beams are developing and micron to nanometer size X-ray beams can be prepared at synchrotron facilities. Kirkpatrick-Baez (KB) mirrors are practical optics to focus down X-ray beams, and the utilization of such focusing X-ray beams enables to visualize the heterogeneous properties of solid materials. Micro-XAFS and nano-XAFS have been developed as simple two-dimensional spatially resolved XAFS techniques and applied for solid samples such as heterogeneous catalysts.

Principle of Micro/Nano-XAFS
The optical setup of micro-XAFS or nano-XAFS is simple as illustrated in Fig. 10.1. An X-ray beam through a slit is focused down by a set of Kirkpatrick-Baez (KB) mirrors, which is composed of two elliptically bended mirrors. A sample is mounted on a piezo stage and set at the focusing point of the X-ray beam. Fluorescent X-rays from the sample is detected on an appropriate detector such as a Ge detector inclined to the sample.
Focusing size of X-ray beams depends on the accuracy of KB mirrors and beam line at a synchrotron facility. Recently, hard X-ray beams for XAFS measurements can be focused down to micron to nanometer size, and XAFS measurements using focused X-ray beams are called as micro-XAFS or nano-XAFS, depending on X-ray beam size. The space resolution of the XAFS measurements is decided by both X-ray beam size and the scanning distance of a piezo stage that a sample is mounted. 100 nm-order X-ray beams are processed in the hard X-ray region for nano-XAFS analysis at SPring-8 (Hyogo, Japan) [1][2][3].
Fluorescent X-rays from a sample irradiated focused X-rays are often so small that sufficient acquisition time is required for micro/nano-XAFS measurements. In particular, EXAFS data requires long acquisition time. The drifts of optics and a sample stage are serious to damage to the space resolution of nano-XAFS measurements with long acquisition time. The drift of temperature is often seriously affected to the drifts of the equipment, and a set of KB mirrors is used to be set in a closed chamber filled with inert helium gas (Fig. 10.2). The visualization of heterogeneous structures of solid materials is one of the important targets in microanalysis. Microscope techniques such as STM and AFM suggest the atomic-scale information of solid surfaces, which are highly important for understanding heterogeneous catalysis. Electron microscopy such as TEM shows the morphologies and lattice parameters of solid materials at nano scale. However, the chemical information (oxidation state, symmetry, local coordination, etc.) cannot be obtained from these microscopy techniques.
Micro/nano-XAFS displays great ability to monitor the chemical information of heterogeneous solid materials at micro/nanometer scale. In the case of a powder sample, which is one of the typical forms of solid materials, the micro/nano-XAFS can separate structural information at particle level (Fig. 10.3). When the size of a focused X-ray beam is similar to that of an individual solid particle, the structural information in the individual particle, which corresponds to the average of all atoms of a target element in the particle, can be obtained by the micro/nano-XAFS. The utilization of a focused X-ray beam whose size is smaller than a sample particle provides the spatial information inside the single particle, and the two-dimensional reflection images of the distribution and chemical states of a target element can be provided.

Applications of Micro-XAFS to Environmental Analysis
Microanalysis using X-ray beam started from environmental analysis application, which is one of the active fields for microanalysis. Various environmental matrices such as rocks, peats, soils, minerals, and sediments have been analyzed by micro-XAFS combining micro-XRF [4]. For examples, Ryser applied micro-XANES analysis to Se-bearing minerals from the Western US phosphate resource area [5]. They broke rock and shale samples to fine powders and measured micro-XAFS to determine Se speciation in the samples. Takahashi also reported the Se distribution in barite in marine sediments and their chemical states by micro-XRF and XAFS [6]. Denecke reported the mapping of Np in a rock with 300 μm size and succeeded in measuring XAFS spectra of the rock by micro-XAFS [7]. Less sample preparation, non-destructive analysis, and high spatial resolution are advantageous of micro-XRF/XAFS. Langner et al. reported the As K-edge micro-XRF/XAFS analysis of As in peat to investigate its spatial distribution [8]. The toxicity of redox-sensitive arsenic highly depends on its oxidation state and speciation [9], and the separation of As (V) and As(III), which are common arsenate, is explored [10,11]. The elementselective feature of micro-XRF showed the distribution of each element (e.g., As, Fe, and S) in the peat. High sensitivity of As K-edge micro-XANES spectra to As Fig. 10.3 A schematics of (a) conventional XAFS for assembled powder, (b) micro-XAFS for a single particle, and (c) nano-XAFS for a single particle oxidation state revealed differences in As oxidation states in the sample and micro-EXAFS enabled the identification of their chemical species.
Industrial waste, ash, and dust were also analyzed by micro-XRF and micro-XAFS techniques and the distribution of several elements in the samples were elucidated [12,13]. Nakai et al. analysed radioactive species in microparticles after the Fukushima nuclear accident in Japan [14]. Various metal elements such as Cs, U, and Pb were observed in aerosol samples collected after the Fukushima nuclear accident. The combination of micro-XRD revealed the chemical states of these elements and the nature of the microparticles.

Applications of Micro/Nano-XAFS to Solid Catalysts
XAFS becomes one of the most typical characterization techniques of solid catalysts, in particular supported metal species on support surfaces because of its non-crystalline structures at the surfaces. Because of their limited loading on support surfaces, the utilization of synchrotron facility is necessary to record high quality data for EXAFS analysis. Micro/nano-XANES/EXAFS are applied to heterogeneous solid catalysts, showing the distribution of composing elements and their local structures. Ce-Zr mixed oxides have been used as supports of automobile exhausting catalysts because of their oxygen storage/release properties [15][16][17]. Ce is the key metal for the oxygen storage/release property, and the bulk oxygen in the mixed oxides fluctuates accompanied with the redox reaction of Ce species (Ce 3þ -Ce 4þ The catalytic activity of methane steam reforming strongly depended on the oxygen content ( y) in the NiO x /CZ-y catalyst. The most reduced phase, Ni/CZ-7 prepared by reduction with H 2 was active under the steady-state reforming conditions, while the most oxidized phase, NiO/CZ-8 prepared by oxidation with O 2 was inactive under the conditions. The activity drastically changed at y ¼ 7.5, and the catalyst showed a remarkable discontinuous behaviour for the methane reforming activity [22].
The catalyst pretreatments (reduction and oxidation) bring about both changes in the attached Ni and the oxygen content ( y) of the CZ-y support. The systematic characterization of the NiO x /CZ-y catalyst by XRD, Ni K-edge XANES and EXAFS, and Ce L III -edge XANES and EXAFS, suggested that metallic Ni was active species for the reforming reaction. It was found that the reforming activity was decided by not only the chemical state of Ni but also the oxygen content ( y) in the CZ-y support. The reduction of NiO x species at the surfaces strongly depended on the nature of the CZ-y support, and the transport of oxygen atoms at the interface of NiO x and the CZ-y surface is suggested to be key issue to decide the reforming activity.
The average size of the CZ-y was 750 AE 370 nm, and a focused hard X-ray beam with a similar size (1000 nm (h) Â 800 nm (v)) can be prepared at Ni K-edge (8332 eV) at the SPring-8 BL37XU station. The catalyst particles were dispersed on a thin SiO 2 membrane with the thickness of 30 μm and oxidized and reduced samples (NiO/CZ-8 and Ni/CZ-7, respectively) were independently prepared by the appropriate oxidation/reduction processes at 773 K. The fraction of aggregated particles on the SiO 2 membranes was estimated to be 0.7 % and 1.9 % for the NiO/ CZ-8 and Ni/CZ-7 samples, respectively, by the analysis of SEM images, indicating the most of the catalyst particles were isolated on the substrates.
The X-ray beam focused by KB mirrors, whose energy was 8428 eV, was irradiated to the sample, and micro-XRF was recorded by two-dimensionally scanning of a sample stage mounting the sample (Fig.   [23] substrates. As shown in Fig. 10.4B, the significant contrasts of both fluorescent X-ray mappings of Ni Kα and Ce Lα þ Lβ 1 at the similar position on the SiO 2 substrate, suggesting the position of the catalyst particle. The acquisition time was 1 or 2 s at each point in Fig. 10.4 [23].
Then the micro-XANES and EXAFS spectra were measured at the center of the catalyst particle determined by the mapping of micro-XRF. Figure 10.5a shows the Ni K-edge micro-XANES spectra of Ni/CZ-7 and NiO/CZ-8. Compared to the reference data of their powder assemblies measured by conventional XAFS with mm-order X-ray beam (Fig. 10.5b), the quality of the micro-XANES spectra was low but the characteristics of the XANES spectra were observed. On the CZ-7 catalyst particle, the white line intensity of the micro-XANES spectrum was much lower than that of the Ni species on the CZ-8 particle, reflecting the oxidation states of the attached Ni species in the individual particles.
We also measured the micro-EXAFS spectrum of the NiO/CZ-8 particle, which was inactive phase for the methane reforming reaction. The Ni K-edge micro-EXAFS spectrum recorded for 3 h could be successfully curve-fitted as shown in Fig. 10.6. Synchrotron beam fluctuation at the observed center position was within 200 nm (1 pixel in Fig. 10.1) over 3 h. Similar oscillations were observed for NiO and the two shells assigned to Ni-O at 0.208 nm and Ni-Ni at 0.292 nm were contributed, where their coordination numbers were 5.4 AE 1.2 and 11.7 AE 0.9, respectively. This is the example of determining the local coordination of a single particle of a practical catalyst by micro-EXAFS.
On the NiO x /CZ-y catalyst, small Ni particles attached on the surface of the CZ support, and the distribution and local coordination of each Ni particles cannot be visualized by micro-XAFS technique because of its spatial resolution much larger than the particle size. The reduction of focusing size of X-ray beams and mechanical drift during measurements should be improved to achieve higher spatial resolution for the micro-analysis. It is significant that the obtained image is two-dimensional reflection of a sample and the resolution of depth direction is lost in the mapping [23].

Analysis of a Single Catalyst Particle by Nano-XAFS
Recently, focused X-ray nanobeam, whose size was 320 nm (h) Â 250 nm (v) or 190 nm (h) Â 290 nm (v), at Ce L III -edge (5.7 keV) was processed at the BL39XU or BL36XU station at SPring-8 (Fig. 10.7) [24]. The beam size is smaller than that of the average particle size of CZ-y, thus two dimensional imaging of Ce oxidation states for Pt-supported CZ-y catalyst particles were recorded by using the focused X-ray beam.
Several Pt/CZ-y samples with different oxygen compositions ( y) ranging between 7 and 8 were prepared on thin SiC membranes (300 nm thick). The appropriate treatments with hydrogen or oxygen brought about changing in their oxygen compositions, which were estimated by powder X-ray diffraction. Accompanied with decreasing oxygen compositions in the CZ-y support by the reduction with H 2 , the down shifts of their diffraction peaks (e.g., (4 4 0) diffraction) were clearly observed, as reflected the expansion of its lattice parameters (Fig. 10.8a). The powder XRD patterns suggested the average oxygen compositions of the CZ-y  [23] particle assemblies on the SiC membranes, and their broad peaks showed the distribution of the oxygen composition in the particle assemblies.
In contrast, nano-XAFS provided the structural information of each particle, as shown in Fig. 10.8b. The 2D imaging at 5.7697 keV, which was an isosbestic point of Ce 3þ and Ce 4þ , showed similar shape of each catalyst particle, which was measured by SEM (Fig. 10.8c). It is well known that Ce L III -edge XANES is highly sensitive to Ce oxidation states, and the intensity ratio (R Ce3þ/Ce4þ ) of the B 0 mode transition (2p ! 4f 1 5d 1 ) of Ce 3þ , whose peak top was observed at 5.7302 keV, and the C mode (2p ! 4f 0 5d 1 ) transitions of Ce 4þ (5.7410 keV) (Eq. 10.1) is regarded to be almost relative to the atomic ratio of Ce 3þ /Ce 4þ (Eq. 10.2) [25,26]. Therefore, the mapping of R Ce3þ/Ce4þ provides the atomic ratio of Ce 3þ /Ce 4þ in the CZ-y particle.
We compared several particles with different oxygen compositions in Fig. 10.8. Significant contrasts of the intensity ratio (R Ce3þ/Ce4þ ) inside the catalyst particles were clearly observed, showing the oxygen composition at each position inside the particles. For examples, in the case of a Pt/CZ-7.6 catalyst particle prepared by the reduction of Pt/CZ-8 with H 2 , whose particle size was 3.2 μm, the center of the particle projection was mainly yellow, whereas the outer region was presented in green. These results indicate that the surface of the particle was more reduced compared to the core of the particle. Other particles with intermediate oxygen compositions showed variation of oxygen components inside the particles, showing the heterogeneous chemical compositions in the single catalyst particles. Ce L III -edge nano-XANES spectra were successfully recorded at each position of the catalyst particles (Fig. 10.9). In the cases of the fully reduced catalyst, the uniform contrast inside the particle was observed, indicating uniform Ce valence states (Ce 3þ ) in the samples. On the other hand, there were significant differences in  [20] the nano-XANES spectra for the particle of Pt/CZ-7.6, whose trend was agreed with the 2D nano-XRF mapping in Fig. 10.8. The nano-XAFS results implied the formation of domain structures of Ce oxidation states in the solid-solution particles.
The present scanning nano-XAFS analysis cannot reveal metal species supported on the surface of CZ support because of its limited spatial resolution. Local structure at the interface of supported metal species and the CZ support would be related to the bulk oxygen diffusion and reactivity of the supported catalysts. The further developments on the spatial resolution of nano-XAFS and the utilization of model catalyst systems would be promising to approach the domain structures of such heterogeneous materials.

Micro/Nano-XAFS Applications to Electrocatalysts and Fuel Cell Catalysts
The synthesis and utilization of electrocatalysts are one of the most important targets for micro/nano-XAFS analysis. In particular, the visualization of membrane electrode assembly (MEA), which is a thin membrane material coated with electrocatalyst layers for polymer electrolyte fuel cell (PEFC), is applied for space-resolved analysis [27]. The synthetic processes of electrocatalysts were also investigated by micro-XAFS analysis combining other micro-analysis techniques, and the compositional and chemical state distributions in metal oxidepolymer matrix systems were reported to improve material quality [28,29]. Takao et al. have succeeded in mapping Pt chemical species in Pt/C cathode catalyst layers in PEFC by a scanning micro/nano-focused beam XAFS mapping method and by a micro/nano-QXAFS method, and provided new pieces of nanospatial information on the site-preferential oxidation, leaching and detachment of Pt cathode nanoparticles in degraded PEFCs [27,30,31]. For the micro/nano-XAFS measurements by micro/nano-beams of 570 nm Â 540 nm and 228 nm Â 225 nm, sliced MEA samples were prepared by picking up the MEA from the PEFC stack,  [20] slicing the MEA to a 1 μm thick piece by an ultra-microtome, putting the sliced piece on a SiN membrane, and arranging the sliced sample-membrane in a designed XAFS cell under humid N 2 . The resultant ex situ micro/nano-XAFS spectra are regarded to be equivalent to in situ XAFS spectra for the degraded PEFC MEA because the MEA piece sample is always under humid N 2 atmosphere without exposing air and the MEA degradation is irreversible. The acquisition time for the scanning micro/nano-XAFS and micro/nano-QXAFS measurements was 1.6 s or 15 min for each spectrum, respectively, under which conditions the MEA samples were not damaged by the miciro/nano-beam irradiation.
Figure 10.10 shows the Pt L III -edge jump mapping (a), normalized white line peak area (WLPA) mapping (b), and Pt valence mapping (c) around the Pt/C cathode layer with a micro-crack in a degraded MEA [27,30]. It is to be noted that the Pt valence in most parts of the micro-crack region was calculated as 2þ by the linear relationship between the normalized WLPA and Pt valence, whereas Pt nanoparticles in the other cathode areas were metallic as shown in Fig. 10.10c [30]. Fig. 10.10 Mapping of Pt chemical species in a degraded MEA by the scanning sub-micro XAFS mapping method and coordination parameters of Pt species by the sub-micro QXAFS method. The acquisition time for the scanning micro/nano-XAFS and micro/nano-QXAFS measurements was 1.6 s or 15 min for each spectrum, respectively [27,30] from the places at the distances of roughly 1.2 and 2.4 μm on both cathode sides of the micro-crack far from the boundary edge to show the maximum Pt valence (Pt 2þ ) in the micro-crack area. The micro-crack areas 1, 5, and 6 accommodated Pt 2þ species and the coordination number (CN) of Pt-O at 0.200 nm was 4.0 (AE0.4) but no Pt-Pt bonding was observed in Fig. 10.10e, which means that the Pt 2þ species does not have any Pt-Pt bonds but have a four-coordinated Pt 2þ -O 4 structure. There are Nafion ionomers with sulfonic group and water in the micro-crack region and the Pt 2þ species may be stabilized by coordination with the sulfonic group (Nf-SO 3 ) as well as H 2 O to form [Pt(Nf-SO 3 ) x (H 2 O) y ] 2þ . It was suggested that Pt nanoparticles at the boundary of the Pt/C cathode layer toward the micro-crack are regarded to be first oxidized, then dissolved into the ionomers with moisture in the micro-crack region [30]. As for the other micro-crack areas 2-4 of Fig. 10.10b, the CNs of Pt-Pt and Pt-O were 1.0-1.8 and 2.7-3.1, respectively, where the Pt valences were estimated as 1.8-1.9. It is probable that both small Pt 0 clusters and Pt 2þ -O 4 species coexist in the micro-crack areas 2-4. Thus, the micro-cracks larger than about 2 μm boundary may promote the MEA degradation by oxidizing and leaching Pt nanoparticles as Pt 2þ -O 4 coordination species.
Takao et al. also reported non-destructive same-view nano (228 nm Â 225 nm)-XAFS and TEM/STEM-EDS imagings for the PEFC MEA Pt/C cathode catalyst layers under humid N 2 atmosphere by using a new same-view stacking membrane cell [31]. The degraded MEA was prepared by anode-gas exchange cycles. The complementary nano-XAFS and STEM-EDS imagings allowed to find the formations of the leached Pt 2þ oxidation species and detached metallic Pt nanoparticles/ clusters in the Nafion ionomer-filled nano-hole areas of the degraded Pt/C cathode due to carbon corrosion. The two ways of either leaching or detaching of the Pt nanoparticles from the carbon support depended on the Pt/ionomer ratios in the nano-hole areas. These detailed degradation aspects could help to design MEA cathodes with better durability.

Perspective
The spatially resolved micro-XAFS and nano-XAFS techniques using X-ray focused beams can provide new insights into the two-dimensional spatial visualization and mapping of the morphology, composition, domain structure, coordination structure, oxidation states, corrosion, aggregation, fragmentation, etc. which are critical issues for property, functionality, and catalysis of micromaterials and nanomaterials such as catalysts, functional materials, fuel cells, batteries, devices, biomaterials, and marine resources. These in situ and ex situ XAFS techniques can also image depth profiles of thin membranes like PEFC MEAs. The techniques can be consorted with other techniques such as TEM/STEM-EDS and ambient-pressure HAXPES, which may address complementary analysis results from combined viewpoints. The element-selective nano-XAFS is a promising technique to visualize the inhomogeneous presence and distribution of chemical states in a single micro/nanoparticle as well as a variety of nanomaterials.

Chapter 11
Computed Laminography XAFS Mizuki Tada and Hirosuke Matsui Three-dimensional imaging of a solid sample is attractive for high-throughput and non-destructive characterization methods, and computed tomography (CT) is well developed and widely used for several analytical methods such as electron microscopy. X-ray computed tomography (XCT) can obtain three-dimensional structural data of a solid sample, in particular morphology and elemental information.
At the measurements of XCT, a sample is perpendicularly rotated to an incident X-rays, and transmission image at each rotating angle is recorded with a two-dimensional detector. A series of transmission images at different rotation angles are computationally reconstructed and a three-dimensional image of the sample is obtained [1,2]. XCT has been applied to functional materials such as heterogeneous catalysts [3,4], lithium batteries [5,6], and PEFC components [7,8].
The conventional reconstruction of XCT requires XCT projected images at all rotating angles to obtain absolute three-dimensional image of a sample (Fig. 11.1). In the case of a flat sample, the cross section of a sample at the rotating angle around 90 is beyond observation field area. To image a flat sample, limited-angle CT, which is a reconstruction method by using projected images at limited rotating angles, and X-ray computed laminography (XCL) have been developed [9].
In XCL, the rotating axis of a sample is not fixed at 90 to incident X-ray beam as shown in Fig. 11.1. The inclined sample stage mounting a sample is rotated and transmitted images are recorded. For examples, Hoshino et al. succeeded in obtaining three-dimensional images of Cu grids with sub-μm spatial resolution by the XCL techniques [9]. On the other hand, limited-angle CT is mainly applied to medical imaging such as mammography/tomography breast imaging [10,11] and dental imaging [12]. The assessment of glued timber integrity was also investigated by limited-angle microfocus XCT [13].
A reconstructed XCT or XCL image at an X-ray energy corresponds to be X-ray absorbance mapping at the energy, as a result, the three-dimensional structural image (morphology) of a sample is visualized. When the X-ray energy of XCT or XCL measurements is changed, a three-dimensional X-ray absorbance mapping at the different X-ray energy is obtained. From XCT or XCL images at particular X-ray energies, spectroscopic information at each position of a sample can be discussed. The method combining XCT/XCL and XAFS spectroscopy is called XCT-XAFS/XCL-XAFS [14], and the integrated analysis of XCT/XCL and XAFS or XRD has been applied to find three-dimensional structural/chemical information to functional materials [15][16][17].
We applied the XCL-XAFS technique to a membrane electrode assembly (MEA) of polymer electrolyte fuel cell (PEFC), which is a flat membrane sample with layered structures. In a PEFC MEA, there are two catalyst layers at cathode and anode, and they are stacked on the surface of a Nafion membrane. The dissolution and degradation of Pt cathode electrocatalysts are still serious problems for practical operation of PEFC, and the XCL-XAFS showed the heterogeneous distribution of Pt cathode electrocatalysts in the MEA in a non-destructive manner [16,17].
MEAs commercially prepared (5 Â 5 cm 2 ) with 50 wt% Pt/C cathode electrocatalysts were conducted to typical voltage-cycling steps. A degraded MEA was prepared by the additional aging and accelerated degradation testing (200 cycles). Both samples were cut into 1 cm Â 1 cm pieces and set on SiC membrane holders. The thickness of the cathode catalyst layer of the fresh MEA was observed to be about 140-210 μm by cross-sectional SEM analysis (Fig. 11.

2).
Ex situ XCL-XAFS of the PEFC MEAs was measured at the BL47XU beamline at SPring-8, Japan. X-rays from the BL47XU undulator were monochromatized by Si(1 1 1) crystals. A rotating beam diffuser composed of a sheet of a paper was installed at the upstream part of the experimental hutch to reduce speckle noises  [16] coming from optical components in the X-ray beam path (Fig. 11.1). The rotational axis of the sample was inclined 30 from the vertical direction, which was perpendicular to the optical axis, toward the downstream direction for the XCL measurements.
XCL images at 11.496 keV, which is the energy before Pt L III -edge, showed the morphology of the MEA samples as shown in Fig. 11.2. The XCL images clearly showed the structures of the MEAs with many cracks in a random pattern. In the degraded MEA after the accelerated degradation testing, the thickness of the cathode catalyst layer was about 115-210 μm and conspicuous expansion of the crack structures was observed throughout the whole area of the cathode catalyst layer.
We recorded XCL images at a different X-ray energy of 11.572 keV after Pt L III edge, which corresponds to be the isosbestic point of Pt and PtO 2 . Difference in X-ray absorption intensity at 11.572 keV to that at 11.496 keV can be calculated by the XCL images at these energies, showing the spatio-distribution of Pt species in the samples.   [16] Large differences were also found on depth-resolved Pt L III -edge XCL-XANES spectra of the fresh and degraded MEAs in Fig. 11.3. In the fresh MEA, the Pt quantity gradually increased with depth of the cathode catalyst layer and reached a maximum at about 170 μm deep. In contrast, more heterogeneous wavy was observed to the depth of the degraded MEA. It is suggested that the degradation process highly affected to the distribution of the Pt electrocatalysts in μm level.
An in situ PEFC cell was developed for in situ XCL-XAFS measurements as presented in Fig. 11.4, and in situ XCL measurements of an MEA for PEFC were investigated under PEFC operating conditions. Figure 11.5 shows the crosssectional XCL images at 11.525 keV of a PEFC MEA with Pt/C cathode electrocatalyst after the 15,000 cycles of ADT. The XCL measurements were performed with the flow of H 2 at anode and that of air at cathode, and the cell was heated at 305 K. The cell voltage was maintained at 0.4 V during the XCL measurements. Total imaging depth of XCL images was about 500 μm, and the thickness of each layer was 0.3125 μm.
At the depth of a gas diffusion layer at cathode, the morphology of carbon fiber was clearly visualized in the cross-sectional XCL image (Fig. 11.5a). At its cathode catalyst layer, the cross-sectional XCL image widely changed and deposited Pt/C (a) A cross-sectional image of its cathode gas diffusion layer, (b) that of its cathode catalyst layer, and (c) that of the interface of its anode catalyst layer and anode gas diffusion layer cathode electrocatalyst was imaged (Fig. 11.5b). At anode, similar contrasts were observed for its anode catalyst layer and its gas diffusion layer (Fig. 11.5c). The in situ XCL measurements clearly showed the morphology of each layers in the MEA.
In the cases of Pt cathode electrocatalysts in PEFC, the structural differences in the Pt electrocatalysts are not so large and the surfaces of Pt nanoparticles oxidized or reduced in the operating cycles. Expected differences in the Pt L III -edge XANES and EXAFS spectra are so small to clearly detect by in situ XCL-XAFS and it was difficult to obtain significant imaging data of Pt L III -edge XCL-XAFS for the sample under in situ conditions with lots of water. The application of limitedangle XCT-XAFS would be promising to approach in situ three-dimensional imaging of PEFC MEAs.

X-Ray Absorption with Transmission X-Ray Microscopes
Frank de Groot

Introduction
In this section we focus on the use of transmission X-ray microscopy (TXM) to measure the XAS spectra. In the last decade a range of soft X-ray and hard X-ray TXM microscopes have been developed, allowing the measurement of XAS spectra with 10-100 nm resolution. In the hard X-ray range the TXM experiments pose the same restrictions on in situ experiments as bulk XAS experiments, allowing experiments with capillaries to study catalysts under working conditions. In the soft X-ray range, dedicated transmission nanoreactors are needed. Considering catalysts the main result the in situ TXM experiments are the determination of nanometer range variations of catalysts under working conditions. An important property of X-rays is their short wavelength below 1 nm. This allows direct imaging of catalysts in scanning mode or full field mode. In contrast, visible light with an energy of 1 eV has a diffraction limited resolution of approximately 500 nm and VUV light with an energy of 10 eV has a diffraction limit of ~50 nm. We will compare TXM microscopes in detail with transmission electron microscopes (TEM) that allow a similar combination with spectroscopy using electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS). We will omit scanning probe near field microscopes as they are limited to surfaces and do not directly look at the interior of catalyst materials, including the non-exposed internal surfaces. Catalytic activity very often takes place within micro and/or mesoporous structures implying that not only the external surface of a catalyst is of importance. Examples include the active sites within zeolites and enzymes. The catalytic active sites in these systems cannot be studied with probes that only map the outside of the system. TEM and TXM F. de Groot (*) Inorganic Chemistry and Catalysis, Utrecht University, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands e-mail: f.m.f.degroot@uu.nl detect a column of material through the system of study. As such they provide information on both the surface structure and the internal structure of a material.

Soft X-Ray TXM Microscopes
In a scanning TXM microscope, a synchrotron X-ray absorption beamline is used to illuminate a Fresnel zone plate. The zone plate characteristics determine the spot size to which the X-ray beam is focused, typically between 10 and 50 nm. The focal length is in the order of a few millimeters, which is a design limitation for in situ reactor cells. Full-field TXMs use two zone plates, allowing the synchronous detection of an image plane [1]. Soft X-ray TXM microscopes cover the energy range between 200 and 2000 eV. This includes the 1s core states or K edges of the elements from carbon (280 eV) to phosphorus (2150 eV) [2]. A range of soft ray TXM microscopes exist, including beamlines at NSLS Brookhaven [3]; BESSY Berlin [4]; SLS Villingen (Pollux) [5]; CLS Saskatoon [6], and ALS Berkeley [7,8]. The soft X-ray range included C, N, O and also Mg, Al, Si, and P. The soft X-ray 2p core states (L 2,3 edges) range from potassium (290 eV) to Sr (2000 eV). In particular the 3d transition metal ions are important for catalysis and are often studied, also because they provide very rich L 2,3 edge spectral shapes. A range of other edges are available for heavier elements. Using the specific absorption of a core level one can obtain quantitative elemental maps in a TXM microscope, for example by determining the ratio between a recorded map just before and after the edge.
Soft X-ray K edges can be interpreted as mapping the empty states of the element under study. The variation in the empty states implies variation in the XAS spectral shape, which can be used for chemical contrast. The spectral shapes of carbon, nitrogen and oxygen containing systems reveal a large variation in spectral shapes and, as such, are ideal for chemical contrast [9]. The transition metal L edges cannot be interpreted with a density of states concept, as their spectral shape is dominated by multiplet effects induced by the core hole in the final state [10]. One observes a rich spectral fine structure allowing detailed chemical analysis. Transition metal L edges are split by the 2p spin-orbit coupling splits the L edge into its L 3 and L 2 components. Intra-atomic correlations (multiplet effects), crystal field effects and the effects of charge fluctuations dominate the spectral shape analysis [11]. Charge transfer multiplet analysis yields information on the metal valence, spin state, the site symmetry, and the crystal field strength [12,13].
Soft X-rays have a strong interaction with matter. This implies that transmission experiments are only possible for solid samples of limited thickness. In addition, the transmission through gas atmospheres is also affected by significant soft X-ray absorption, limiting the X-ray path through the gas phase to several 100 μm. The windows should ideally have thickness below 50 nm of a light material. The sample thickness for soft X-rays must ideally be in the (sub)micron range, dependent also on concentration and elemental composition. Note that the experiments are transmission experiments implying that the edge energy and concentration of the probed element determines the ideal thickness of the sample.
Because of the X-ray transmission induced sample limitations, traditionally soft XAS spectra have been measured with electron yield detection or fluorescence yield (FY) detection. Yield methods use the core hole decay, which gives rise to electrons and X-rays escaping from the surface of the substrate. Detection of these decay products, allows the measurement of samples with arbitrary thickness. With total electron yield (TEY), one detects all electrons that emerge from the sample surface and due to the electron escape depth of a few nm this turns the TXM into a surface technique. For dilute systems, transmission might not yield a measurable signal and FY is an option. A complication is that the optical component of a TXM microscope is usually very close to the sample, which makes it difficult to use TEY and FY detectors. Soft X-ray TXM is ideally suited to study, in addition to the organic phase (by their C, N, O K edges) also the inorganic phase via their metal edges.
In Fig. 12.1 we compare the spatial resolution and the maximal sample thickness of a TXM experiment with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) combined with Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy (EELS). TEM-EELS can be considered as the electron analogue of TXM-XAS. The data for TEM-EELS assumes a 100 keV electron beam. The resolution of TEM-EELS is between 0.1 and 0.5 nm, with some possible improvements to less than 0.1 nm [14][15][16]. The maximal sample thickness for chemical contrast imaging is dependent on the material. TXM experiments have resolution of approximately 10 nm [17], larger than the diffraction limited resolution. The maximal sample thickness of TXM is dependent on energy. In case of edge absorption in the soft X-ray range the sample thickness for which the signal is not distorted can be as low as 50 nm. This does not mean that thicker samples cannot be measured, but the signal will be distorted. For hard X-rays, for example at 10 keV one needs different, thicker, zone plates. Recently hard X-ray zone plates have also reached resolution of 10 nm. The reduced X-ray absorption strength and scattering of hard X-rays increase the possible sample thickness towards the mm range. Hard X-ray microscopy experiments in the micron range are very interesting for catalysis as the hard X-rays allow realistic catalytic conditions.

In Situ Soft X-Ray TXM of Catalytic Solids
The first in situ TXM-XAS experiments on a working catalyst have been published in 2008 by de Smit et al. [18]. They measured an iron-based Fischer-Tropsch catalyst under working conditions. The Fischer-Tropsch reaction enables the production of high-purity chemicals and transportation fuels from sources other than conventional crude oil, most notably natural gas, coal, and biomass.
Figure 12.2 shows an example of an Fe 2 O 3 nanoparticle that was reduced under 1 bar hydrogen pressure. After initial reduction on the outside the reduction is first complete in the interior of the nanoparticle. For the Fischer-Tropsch catalyst the Fe 2p XAS was used to map the iron valence and the oxygen K edge to distinguish between different oxygen-containing species (SiO 2 and iron oxides; cf. Fig. 12.3). The carbon K edge was measured to image the type and location of carbon species present in the catalyst during reaction. For further details, we refer to the original publications [19]. As such, this nanoscale chemical imaging technique provides insights into the local particle morphology and chemical reduction behavior of a complex Fischer-Tropsch catalyst system.

Nanoreactors
One common goal in the design of nanoreactors is the minimization of the path length that X-rays have to travel through the gas and/or liquid reactant phase. This will minimize X-ray attenuation and yield higher signal intensities. One possibility is to use nanoreactors that are designed for in situ TEM studies [20]. The current design of the cell allows for experiments up to ~2 bar and 500 C (Fig. 12.4).

Comparison of STXM-XAS with STEM-EELS
The main difference between STXM-XAS and STEM-EELS is the significantly stronger interaction with matter of electrons compared with X-rays [21]. Table 12.1 gives a brief overview and in the subsequent paragraphs we briefly discuss these aspects, including energy resolution, energy range, time resolution, spatial resolution, detection modes, detection limits, sample thickness, sample conditions, sample damage, and tomography options.

Spatial and Energy Resolution
The spatial resolution can be below 0.1 nm for STEM-EELS microscopes [22,23], which is a factor 100 better than the spatial resolution in STXM-XAS. The energy resolution of soft X-rays on a STXM beamline is typically E/ΔE ¼ 5000 and implying better than 0.2 eV resolution at the carbon K edge. De facto this implies that for solids the experimental resolution is mainly determined by the lifetime broadening of the core holes. The energy resolution of EELS varies significantly from microscope to microscope. Most EELS-dedicated microscopes have a core level energy resolution of 0.2-0.5 eV.

Detection Modes and Limits
In STEM-EELS all core levels are measured simultaneously. In STXM-XAS, the X-ray energy is set to one particular value and only at that energy the X-ray absorption is measured. STXM-XAS can be measured with EY and turned into a surface probe, or it can be measured with FY for dilute species. STEM-EELS and STXM-XAS are transmission experiments and the required contrast for a core level signal implies that spectral shapes of dilute species cannot be measured. As a rule, concentrations above 5000 ppm are required for good spectra.

In Situ Conditions and Sample Thickness
Soft X-ray STXM can be measured up to 2 bar and up to 550 C. Hard X-ray experiments can be performed under extreme conditions, including high-pressure diamond anvil cells. STEM-EELS requires a sample less than ~200 nm thin. STXM-XAS can handle samples with thicknesses up to 20 μm at 1.5 keV and in the millimeter range for hard X-rays. The much thicker specimen that can be handled with STXM-XAS offers a wider and more flexible range of materials that can be studied, including objects such as intact biological cells.

Sample Damage
STEM-EELS requires a high radiation dose in comparison with normal TEM, which implies that sample damage is potentially high, including knock-on damage, carbon deposition, sputtering, and electrostatic charging. In STXM-XAS a highly focused X-ray beam is used, which, especially at resonance, generates large amount of electrons, yielding damage from electrostatic charging and carbon deposition. Combining all beam damage effects and the required doses for imaging, as a rule it is found that STXM-XAS causes less damage than STEM-EELS [24,25].
In conclusion, it can be stated that STEM-EELS offers better spatial resolution and the simultaneous detection of all core levels. STXM-XAS can handle large samples and a wider range of sample conditions including catalysis under working conditions.

Future Developments
The temperature and pressure range of STXM will increase to 1000 C and 10 bar, thereby extending the range of feasible materials science and catalysis experiments. An important future development is the performance of in situ STXM tomographic experiments. STXM of ultra-dilute samples with concentrations down to 100 ppm are not straightforward in transmission mode, implying that fluorescence yield detection must be used. Such fluorescence yield based experiments would allow the mapping of impurities/promoters in heterogeneous catalyst and in materials science in general.
STXM will likely not reach the 0.1 nm spatial resolution as obtained by electron microscopy. STEM-EELS experiments on the other hand will be unfeasible for many samples and for many sample conditions.

Chapter 13
Operando EXAFS and XANES of Catalytic Solids and Related Materials Gareth T. Whiting, Florian Meirer, and Bert M. Weckhuysen

Introduction
The continuous improvement of X-ray sources, optics, and detectors since the start of the twenty first century has paved the way for unprecedented studies of functional materials at work. Studying these typically highly complex materials while they are working requires a sophisticated combination of analysis techniques that can provide chemical information about the ongoing processes at multiple timeand/or length scales. This makes X-rays an excellent probe for such studies, as they are (usually) non-destructive, can be used for relatively fast processes (0.01-2 s), and can operate in harsh environments, for example under high pressure or temperature. In order to link the (spatio-)temporal chemical information obtained by X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) to the task performed by the functional material, it is necessary to collect additional complementary information about the running process (performance). It is this simultaneous measurement together with a combined data analysis that defines "operando" studies.
We therefore want to start by defining the term "operando," in the context of XAS and how it differs from the term "in situ." Taking the topic of catalysis as an example, "operando" (latin for working/operating) XAS analysis (oxidation state, local coordination, etc.) involves studying the catalyst in its working place, under true reaction conditions. Whereas "in situ" (latin for on site), has been reported for both true and model catalytic reaction conditions. Moreover, in order for a system to be termed "operando," the simultaneous online analysis of activity and/or selectivity (performance) with for example, mass spectrometry (MS) or gas chromatography (GC), must take place [1,2]. Therefore by combining XAS with online performance analysis, molecular-level structure-activity relationships are formed, such as linking the redox properties of catalytic active sites with changes in catalyst activity/selectivity. In line with this aspect, operando is also in turn used to verify the validity of the measurements under the environment of the X-ray beam (compared to a standard reactor). Factors such as local heating, or chemical and/or structural damage by the X-ray beam are potential problems which can lead to influences on the performance of the material [3].
Although this description of operando XAS may appear simplistic, the combination of both structural/chemical characterization (XANES/EXAFS) and performance analysis under true reaction conditions poses a considerable challenge. Depending on the heterogeneous catalytic process (solid/liquid or solid/gas interface), true reaction conditions often refer to "harsh" conditions, such as high pressures, high temperatures and in some cases potentially harmful reactants/ products (among others), which requires the use of specially designed reactors/ cells. Moreover, correlating XAS data with performance data in a spatially and temporally resolved manner is considerably difficult, given the bulk nature of "standard" XANES/EXAFS analysis and the fast kinetics of most catalytic reactions, respectively. Therefore, advanced XAS techniques are required (i.e., Quick-XAS, transmission X-ray microscopy), which make it possible to measure spectra on the sub-second time-scale and in a spatially resolved manner.
The origin of the term "operando" in relation to spectroscopy was first proposed during a discussion between Eric Gaigneaux, Gerhard Mestl, Miguel Bañares, and Bert Weckhuysen in 2000 during the 220th ACS National Meeting in Washington, DC (USA) [4]. This has since led to a succession of international conferences on the topic of operando spectroscopy, with the first in Lunteren (The Netherlands), in March 2003. The first time the term "operando" spectroscopy was used in a publication was by Miguel Bañares and coworkers in 2002, whereby a combination of Raman spectroscopy and online gas chromatography (GC) were applied, to develop structure-activity relationships of supported vanadium oxide catalysts under working propane selective oxidation (and ammoxidation) conditions [5]. Here, it was discovered that both surface mono-oxo vanadium oxide species and SbVO 4 phases are necessary for efficient propane ammoxidation. This gives a very early example of the type of information that can be acquired under operando conditions, with more detailed examples to be discussed later on in this Chapter. However, it is fair to state here, that there already exists several earlier literature examples, which combined spectroscopy of the working catalyst with online activity measurements, but did not use the term "operando" (represented by the fading empty squares in Fig. 13.1).
When looking to the operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) literature (Fig. 13.1), it is clear that the introduction of this term into the scientific community in 2000 received great interest, with many publications produced thereafter, increasing year by year. Although only a limited number of publications exist in the operando XAS literature (139 compared to 3534 in situ studies), it is important to note that not all authors employ the term "operando" when performing simultaneous online performance analysis, and still use the term "in situ". In this chapter, we discuss, making use of relevant case studies (Fig. 13.2), some of the fields that employ operando XAS, including catalysis, batteries, sensors, and fuel cells. Our main focus is on the topic of heterogeneous catalysis, discussing the use of operando XAS for several important processes and its influence on our further understanding of these systems. We refer the interested reader to several recent review articles, which are relevant to this topic, and which describe in more detail some of the developments taking place in this exciting field of research [6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13].

Operando XAS in Catalysis and Related Materials

Case Study 1: Fischer-Tropsch Synthesis
The Fischer-Tropsch Synthesis (FTS) process, invented by Franz Fischer and Hans Tropsch in 1926, involves the conversion of synthesis gas (mixture of H 2 and CO), into long-chain hydrocarbons [14]. The process is carried out industrially using an iron-or cobalt-based supported catalyst, with cobalt favored due to its high activity and selectivity to linear paraffins, while iron is relatively cheap with respect to cobalt, and is now also explored for lower olefin synthesis. For example, in Qatar, gas-to-liquid (GTL) plants such as "Oryx" (Qatar Petroleum/Sasol) and "Pearl" (Shell), are based on Co-based catalysts [15]. Catalytic performance is of great value to industrial companies, with catalyst deactivation currently a substantial problem, fueling significant research interest [16][17][18][19][20]. Given that the catalyst in question undergoes many stages such as activation, induction, reaction, and recycling during FTS, accompanied by a range of deactivation mechanisms, a better understanding of the working catalyst behavior is vital. Sintering, reoxidation of the metal active site, and mixed metal-support compound formation are some of the possible causes for deactivation [21,22], which require catalyst characterization under realistic FTS working conditions. The most common method of characterization is on spent catalysts, but is hampered by wax coverage on the catalyst, as well as problems with air sensitivity of the active metal [21]. Therefore, in situ or operando characterization methods are necessary in order to unravel the complex bulk/surface deactivation mechanisms taking place. Realistic FTS conditions are in the range of 210-250 C, 15-30 bar and a H 2 /CO ratio of ~2. Therefore, in situ cell design is one crucial and often limiting factor when considering the choice of characterization technique. XAS offers an excellent means to obtain structural  Ishiguro et al. 64 6 6  Cycle 0. and chemical information of the active metal (as well as other elements) during these conditions, provided that the cell used allows meeting the relevant conditions. By coupling X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) of the working catalyst with online catalytic performance monitoring and relating it with catalyst deactivation on a molecular-level scale, operando studies offer the best solution to improve cycle length, catalytic activity and selectivity. Given that very few XAS studies in the literature actually operate under true operando conditions, we will provide a brief outline here of these experiments on supported Co-based catalysts.
As discussed previously, cell design is of vital importance in determining the possibility of performing time-resolved experiments with conditions that mimic "real/working" catalytic reaction conditions. Rochet et al. [23] describe the use of an XAS cell (based on the design of Kawai et al. [24]) to study the structure and behavior of cobalt nanoparticles on a supported FTS catalyst. The catalyst under investigation consists of 7 wt% Co on alumina, prepared via incipient wetness impregnation and activated under a reducing atmosphere. The in situ cell is designed around its low-volume, with mica windows [25] that are X-ray-transparent and structurally, chemically, and thermally stable (Fig. 13.3a). Given that operando experiments require the potential to work under robust reaction conditions, the XAS cell is in line with this and can reach temperatures as high as 600 C, with up to 50 bar pressure and under a range of oxidizing or reducing gas mixtures.
Unlike standard extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) measurements which can take up to 20 min-1 h to acquire an X-ray absorption spectrum, Quick-EXAFS (QEXAFS) measurements allow the acquisition of the EXAFS in just a few seconds using a continuous-scan mode of the monochromator and maintains a high signal-to-noise ratio. QEXAFS experiments were performed in transmission mode at the SAMBA beamline at SOLEIL (Source Optimise ´e de Lumie `re d'Energie Interme ´diaire de LURE), France, with the outlet of the reactor cell connected to an AirHead™ probe for online Raman spectroscopy monitoring of hydrocarbons produced. The conversion rate of CO was determined using a known CO partial pressure at the inlet and measuring it again at the outlet of the cell. Also, by applying a multivariate analysis approach to the C-H vibration bands that formed, information regarding product (alkane) selectivity was obtained, in order to relate performance with structural alterations on the catalyst (QEXAFS). During the activation treatment (under reducing atmosphere), the X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) of the recorded spectra revealed that the Co 3 O 4 spinel structure in CoO was reduced as expected, to metallic cobalt. However, 23 % of the catalyst was still present as CoO, showing an insufficient reduction. When switching to a syngas atmosphere (270 C, H 2 /CO ratio of 2 at 20 bar), 76 % CO conversion was achieved and a significant intensity of Raman bands attributed to alkanes (69 % methane) and water were produced, with a slight reoxidation of the Co metallic nanoparticles. This was observed to be nanoparticle size-dependent using EXAFS analysis, with 2-4 nm nanoparticles being thermodynamically susceptible to oxidation. As methane selectivity and water production is drastically reduced upon decreasing the reaction temperature to 230 C (accompanied by an increase in selectivity towards higher alkanes), the cobalt species are further reduced. This is associated with the increasing partial pressure of water, with a metal core-thin oxide layer-like structure thought to form. However, it is inherently difficult to interpret such structures from a mixture of "totally reduced Co nanoparticles... mixed with irreducible small CoO nanoparticles" [23].
Rochet et al. [28] in another case use a similar catalyst and the same XAS cell with the outlet attached to a Gas Chromatograph (GC), in order to measure catalytic performance simultaneously. However, the actual catalytic testing was performed prior to XAS measurements at SOLEIL and therefore does not fall under our definition of operando. Nonetheless, this shows the potential difficulties, (such as transport of equipment to synchrotron facilities), posed when performing operando experiments at synchrotron facilities.
Coupling a mass spectrometer to the outlet of the in situ cell provides another means of measuring catalytic performance simultaneously during XAS analysis. Tsakoumis et al. [26] display an excellent example of this combined XAS/highresolution-X-ray powder diffraction (HR-XRPD) operando experiment, on both 1 wt% Re promoted and unpromoted 20 wt% Co/γ-Al 2 O 3 for FTS (220 C, 18 bar, H 2 /CO ¼ 2.1). The combination of techniques allowed information to be gathered on both short-(EXAFS) and long-range order (XRD), with the catalyst studied throughout all stages of FTS. Experiments were performed at the Swiss-Norwegian Beamlines (SNBL) at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) (station BM01B), using a quartz capillary in situ cell. Its diameter of 980 μm is significantly smaller than that of the cell employed by Rochet et al. [23] (13 mm). However, results were in good agreement with those of a lab-scale fixed-bed reactor. During the activation period, XANES analysis with online mass spectrometry (MS) showed that both the unpromoted and promoted catalysts are reduced at different rates from spinel Co 3 O 4 to metallic cobalt, accompanied by an increase in the amount of water produced, as evidenced by Rochet et al. [23]. During the induction period, divalent cobalt was detected in the promoted catalyst, with the unpromoted catalyst subject to further reduction. With no change in the XAS signal observed during deactivation (displayed by MS), any bulk transformations were disregarded. Therefore, a surface-related deactivation mechanism explained this phenomenon; however, it shows that the bulk nature of XAS analysis is one limitation when probing catalyst reactor beds.
Cats et al. have applied a means to overcome this limitation, using Transmission X-ray Microscopy (TXM), to gain spatial resolution (better than 30 nm in 2D) on a single working 15 wt% Co/TiO 2 FTS catalyst particle [29]. Again, this research is not strictly operando in our definition, as the catalytic performance data was collected (using MS) prior to the XANES analysis in the same in situ capillary cell (used at the synchrotron) with the same reaction conditions (10 bar, 250 C, CO:H 2 ¼ 1:2). The reduction to metallic Co is evident during the reduction step, with only a small contribution of oxidized Co (CoTiO 3 and CoO). During FTS, there was no change in chemical state of Co under these reaction conditions, even on a local scale.
As stated previously, Fe-based catalysts are also important in the FTS process and are on par with Co-based catalysts in terms of the number of operando XAS investigations. One of the more standout case studies is on the stability and reactivity of ε, χ, and θ iron-carbide phases during realistic FTS conditions (10 bar, 250 C, CO/H 2 : 5:5 mL/min) by de Smit et al. [27]. Using a combination of XAS/X-ray diffraction (XRD)/Raman spectroscopy, coupled with an online MS (connected to the outlet of the capillary reactor), (Fig. 13.3c) operando studies were performed at the SNBL, ESRF, France. It is known that a number of phases (ε-Fe 2 C, ε 0 -Fe 2.2 C, Fe 7 C, χ-Fe 5 C 2 , and θ-Fe 3 C) form during high-pressure/temperature FTS, but the exact role on the catalytic performance is unclear. Unfortunately, the small crystallite size, accompanied by the sensitive nature of the catalyst (oxidized upon exposure to air), do not allow for correct ex situ studies and therefore the application of operando XAS is vital. It was shown that a catalyst consisting of mainly crystalline χ-Fe 5 C 2 was vulnerable to oxidation during FTS, while a separate catalyst containing θ-Fe 3 C and amorphous carbide phases obtained a lower activity and selectivity. This was associated with the successive formation of carbonaceous species (studied by Raman spectroscopy) on the surface of the catalyst. Therefore, we can now say that such amorphous phases (and the resulting textural properties of the catalyst) have a major influence on the determination of the catalyst performance.
The lack of spatial resolution in the field of operando XAS is one current limitation that needs to be addressed in the future. Previous to the work of Cats et al. [29] who employed in situ TXM to investigate Co-based catalysts, Gonzalez-Jimenez et al. used the same technique to investigate the reduction degree and distribution of Fe in a 20 μm Fe-based catalyst particle (mixture of Fe 2 O 3 /TiO 2 / ZnO/K 2 O) during realistic FTS conditions (10 bar, 350 C, Co/H 2 ¼ 1) [30]. Again, it is important to note that this is not an operando study in our definition, due to the off-line analysis of the catalytic performance, but is an excellent example of the possibilities available to us regarding spatial resolution (~30 nm). Initially it was observed that the fresh particle was present in a trivalent oxidized phase of Fe 3) over the catalyst particle after 7 h on stream (Adapted from Ref. [30])
conditions and compared with TXM data. It was shown that with increasing time on stream, FeC x crystallites enlarge or increase in number, which is linked with an increasing selectivity to methane (and decrease in selectivity to CO).
It is clear that these few operando studies are paving the way to a better understanding of the structure-performance relationships in FTS processes. The combination of XAS analysis with online catalytic performance allows for a better understanding of the mechanistic aspects during the reaction, which cannot be realized with model systems or under idealistic conditions (in situ/ex situ). Usually these methods provide information on catalysts that are exposed to environments other than the true working conditions, or on catalysts, which contain an unrealistic loading of active metal. Given the numerous deactivation mechanisms proposed from such studies, these recent operando studies help resolve these postulations.
We have now obtained a relation of Co oxidation/reduction with water partial pressure produced in the reactor, together with monitoring of the Co local structure during all stages of the FTS process. Although vast improvements have been made on these initial operando studies, more focus is needed on the enhancement of spatial resolution (i.e., TXM), as XAS is a bulk technique and catalyst surface-gas phase information is needed to further the development of the catalytic FTS process.

Case Study 2: Benzyl Alcohol Oxidation
The partial oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes and ketones plays a major role in the fine chemicals industry. An example of which is the selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde, used in processes such as the production of perfumes and pharmaceuticals, to name but a few. Benzaldehyde is commonly produced using environmentally undesirable solvents, such as chlorinated hydrocarbons [31]. The use of oxidants such as O 2 , H 2 O 2 , and t-butylhydroperoxide (TBHP) are now increasingly reported in the presence of solid catalysts, due to their benign impact on the environment and their cheap cost [32,33]. Examples of catalysts commonly employed are transition metal compounds (e.g., Mo, Mg) [34,35] or supported monometallic/bimetallic precious metal catalysts (e.g., Au, Pd) [36,37]. Promoter metals are often added to enhance activity, product selectivity and prevent catalyst deactivation. However, the exact role of the promoter and how it affects the catalytic process is complex and still under debate [38]. Some possible explanations could be the geometric blocking or protection of the active metal center, or even alloy formation [39]. Taking Pd as an example, the aerobic oxidation of benzyl alcohol follows a two-step dehydrogenation mechanism, whereby the alkoxide is adsorbed, before β-H elimination to produce benzaldehyde. The reaction takes place on reduced Pd sites, with the role of oxygen to shift the equilibrium towards the aldehyde product (by oxidizing the co-product hydrogen) with complex side reactions [38][39][40]. As this reaction proceeds in the liquid-phase environment, characterization techniques are required which can study the catalyst during realistic reaction conditions. Spectroscopic techniques are an obvious choice, particularly Attenuated Total Reflection Infrared (ATR-IR) to follow surface species evolving, due to its "enhanced selectivity towards the solid-liquid interface" [39], but also XAS to follow the oxidation state and local structure of the metals present on the catalyst. Moreover, in order to form an understanding of the structure-performance relationship of the working catalyst, operando investigations are vital.
One of the earliest examples of operando XAS analysis on supported catalysts dates back as early as 2003, with Grunwaldt et al. using a 0.5 wt% Pd/Al 2 O 3 supported catalyst and "supercritical" CO 2 (scCO 2 ) as the solvent for benzyl alcohol oxidation [41]. The use of quotation marks for supercritical is because the CO 2 is present as "a dense fluid phase at temperatures exceeding its mixture critical point." In order to establish the realistic high-pressure reaction conditions required for such a reaction (150 bar, flow of 0.11 mol/min), and given the spectroscopic and safety issues at play, a specially designed in situ cell was employed. An important aspect of the cell was that its volume was drastically smaller (0.5 mL) than a conventional fixed-bed reactor (38 mL), however, results obtained with both were remarkably comparable. Whilst the sieved catalyst was held in place by two quartz wool plugs inside the compartment (attached to an oven), the outlet of the reactor was connected to a MS for simultaneous online catalytic performance analysis. QEXAFS experiments were performed in the continuous scanning mode at the Hamburger Synchrotron Labor (HASYLAB at DESY, Germany), with the aim to gain structural information of the catalyst (oxidation state of Pd) under a reducing atmosphere and during reaction conditions. The XAS time-resolved reduction of the PdO x /Al 2 O 3 catalyst by benzyl alcohol (150 bar, 80 C, alcohol feed rate of 0.002 mol/min) showed a decrease in the white line at 24.362 eV (Fig. 13.5a) associated with palladium oxide. Following reduction, liquid CO 2 was introduced, with the temperature raised to 80 C and benzyl alcohol and oxygen added. Almost immediately, the catalyst was slightly oxidized (displayed by a change in the nearedge structure of the Pd K-edge), most probably due to residual oxygen in the solvent. One limitation of performing XAS analysis at such high pressure is the higher degree of noise in the spectra, which could be "due to slight fluctuations in pressure induced by the compressor causing a change in density." The oxygen concentration in the feed was varied in order to observe the effect on the oxidation state of Pd during the reaction (Fig. 13.5a). By increasing the oxygen concentration in the feed, the rate of alcohol conversion went through a maximum. This was clearly due to the higher surface coverage of oxygen on Pd particles (observed in XAS spectra), favoring the oxidation reaction. However, increasing the oxygen concentration further lead to over-oxidized Pd (creating PdO x species), producing a decrease in activity with fewer reduced Pd sites available for alcohol adsorption/ oxidation (Fig. 13.5b).
The more common approach to aerobic benzyl alcohol oxidation involves a liquid phase catalytic reaction. Mondelli et al. studied a 0.75 wt% Bi promoted 5 wt % Pd/Al 2 O 3 catalyst during the reaction [39]. Using a combined approach of ATR-IR and XAS analysis, coupled to a Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) spectrometer , operando studies allow the simultaneous relation between the surface species evolved, the metals oxidation state and the catalytic performance. The core of the setup is based around the interchangeable cells used for ATR-IR and XAS measurements (analogous conditions). However, stringent comparison of data obtained by both techniques is only meaningful to a limited extent due to the different cell designs, which can affect mass transport properties. A continuous flow cell reactor (0.12 mL volume) was employed at ANKA Synchrotron Laboratory (Forschungszentrum, Karlsruhe, Germany) for studying the Bi L 3 -edge and also at HASYLAB, DESY (Beamline X1, Hamburg, Germany) for investigation of the Pd K-edge. The amount of benzaldehyde in the effluent of the in situ cell was calibrated using the Beer-Lambert law and solutions of known concentrations. When dehydrogenation conditions were employed (Ar atmosphere), low activity was observed for both Bi-promoted and unpromoted catalysts, with both metals in a reduced state. ATR-IR showed a significantly higher amount of CO was present on the surface of the unpromoted catalyst in contrast to the promoted catalyst. It appears that Bi prevents side reactions, in particular, the decarbonylation and further oxidation of benzaldehyde. Although a large increase in activity was observed immediately after aerobic conditions were introduced, the Pd and Bi oxidation states remained stable (EXAFS) for the Bi-Pd/Al 2 O 3 catalysts (Fig. 13.5c). The suggested "geometric blocking of Pd by Bi" as well as Bi controlling the oxygen supply to the active metallic center, appears to inhibit Pd-reoxidation, maintaining high catalytic activity and selectivity.
These studies show that operando XAS can be used even under the harshest of reaction conditions in "supercritical" and liquid-phase processes. One of the main reasons that operando conditions can be applied for this process is the cell design, which unlike previous in situ experiments, allows the capture of surface species formed (using spectroscopic techniques) leading to catalytic performance evaluation, with simultaneous structural/oxidation state analysis. As stated previously, these structure-performance relationships are vital, with an understanding of the role of the promoter in the complex reaction mechanisms potentially leading to better process efficiency, due to enhanced catalyst development. Previously obtained knowledge on the liquid-phase oxidation of alcohols mainly focused on the use of spectro-electrochemical methods, with model catalysts and electrolytic solutions [42][43][44]. However, these operando XAS case studies finally provide a means to observe the link between species evolving on the catalyst surface and the role of the promoter, which can lead to better catalyst design.

Case Study 3: Propane Dehydrogenation
The significant interest in the catalytic dehydrogenation of light alkanes, in particular propane, is due to the high demand for propene (also commonly referred to as propylene), as an important intermediate for a range of chemical applications, i.e., polypropylene production [45]. Supported Cr-based catalysts are typically used in the industrial process, with alternatives such as Pt and Mo also offering high activity [46][47][48]. Conventionally, propane dehydrogenation runs under cyclic operation, with successive reaction and regeneration steps (at around 500-650 C, atmospheric pressure). However, a major problem is associated with fast catalyst deactivation, known to occur via coking or cracking, influencing both stability and selectivity, respectively [49]. This therefore ensures a large expense for the operator, but also a diminishing selectivity towards propene each regeneration cycle. To tackle this problem, a better understanding of how the catalyst operates and deactivates under realistic reaction conditions (many cycles) is needed, with many reports only focusing on characterization of the catalyst before and after one cycle. In particular, it is vital to obtain a correlation between the oxidation state/ local structure of the active metal with catalytic performance (i.e., the decline in propene selectivity). In situ XAS provides an excellent means to obtain this information, but given that coke formation is one of the main contributors to catalyst deactivation, other spectroscopic techniques are also required in order to observe its extent. Therefore, the need for a combination of several techniques at once under realistic reaction conditions to study the complex reaction mechanism, whilst simultaneously obtaining online catalytic performance, poses a real challenge. Here we briefly discuss how this is achieved, with up to three simultaneous characterization techniques in an operando setup.
In order to develop an understanding of the catalyst behavior during dehydrogenation and regeneration during typical propane dehydrogenation conditions, Beale et al. proposed a unique combination of ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis)/ Raman/XAS in one setup [50]. Performed a decade ago, this was the first reported use of more than two spectroscopic techniques simultaneously to study heterogeneous catalysts at work. Using either a 13 wt% Mo-Al 2 O 3 or -SiO 2 supported catalyst, the aim was to discover the active site and deactivation mechanisms which take place during successive propane dehydrogenation cycles at 550 C. Figure 13.6 depicts the setup in a simplistic manner, with the focal point based around the specially designed quartz reactor tube (6 mm o.d. and 1 mm i.d.) "ground down on three sides to approximately 200 μm to ensure sufficient X-ray transmission" [50]. Energy dispersive (ED)-EXAFS allows the collection of the whole X-ray absorption spectrum during fast processes (using a poly-chromator crystal) and was applied in transmission mode, with UV-Vis and Raman spectra obtained with detectors placed orthogonal to the X-ray beam, and opposite to each other. Experiments were performed on beamline ID24 at the ESRF (Grenoble, France) with an ED-XAFS spot size of 300 μm and the reactor outlet connected to a MS for online catalytic performance analysis. Taking the first propane dehydrogenation cycle (PD1) using Mo/SiO 2 as an example, the combination of UV-Vis (band at 350 nm), Raman (Mo species on the surface) and ED-EXAFS (1s-4d pre-edge feature at 20,002 eV), Beale et al. were able to determine that "Mo 6þ species were present as a mixture of distorted tetrahedral and octahedral environments." These features soon decreased during the subsequent PD step. This was accompanied with a darkening of the catalyst evidenced by UV-Vis (overall decrease in the diffuse reflectance), suggesting coke formation. A decrease in the pre-edge peak intensity and a corresponding increase in the 1s-5p transition (20,022 eV), were consistent with some reduction of Mo 6þ to Mo 4þ . As this was an operando study, these features were linked with online catalytic activity, whereby a decline in propene production confirmed the initial deactivation of the catalyst. Upon regeneration (5 % O 2 /He), the changes witnessed were reversed to some extent, but with an increase in the size of the MoO 3 clusters (combined with CO 2 formation due to coke burning or propane combustion), noted to lead to irreversible catalyst deactivation in subsequent cycles.
In comparison with Mo/Al 2 O 3 , the initial coke formation occurred at a higher rate than in Mo/SiO 2 . Finally, the dispersed MoO 3 species present on the surface Mo/Al 2 O 3 were found to be harder to reduce than the MoO 3 clusters on Mo/SiO 2 . Almost 5 years later, Iglesias-Juez et al. used a combination of UV-Vis/Raman together with operando high-energy resolution fluorescence detected (HERFD) XANES measurements, in order to observe the effect multiple reactionregeneration cycles have on catalytic behavior [51]. HERFD-XANES offers an enhanced signal-to-noise ratio, by tuning the emitted energy to a fluorescence line and recording the intensity variation of the fluorescence line as a function of the incident energy. In particular, they sought to understand the "structural and electronic properties of supported Pt and Pt-Sn nanoparticles" of both supported Pt/Al 2 O 3 and promoted Sn-Pt/Al 2 O 3 catalysts. As the UV-Vis/Raman measurements were recorded separately from the XAS data, we will focus mainly on the latter, together with its online monitoring of catalytic performance using a MS. Beamline ID26 at the ESRF was used in combination with an in situ cell (max. temperature of 1000 C) provided by the Sample Environment Support Service (SESS) of the ESRF. Each cycle consisted of a reduction at 600 C (20 % H 2 /He) and a subsequent propane dehydrogenation step (10 % C 3 H 8 /He, 600 C), followed by regeneration (O 2 ) and re-reduction (H 2 ). A total of ten cycles were investigated. In terms of catalytic activity, the Sn promoted Pt/Al 2 O 3 catalyst achieved a higher propene turnover and higher stability. This was discovered to be associated with the formation of an Sn-Pt alloy, which "modifies the Pt electronic properties leading to more electron-poor, active particles" [51]. The lower propane conversion obtained by the Pt/Al 2 O 3 catalyst was due to the stronger interaction of propane with Pt, revealed by the Pt L 3 μXANES data (changes in the white line intensity and shift of the edge position, after pre-edge background removal). This was also used to explain the higher coke formation on the catalyst, with blocking of potential active sites (with species such as doubly bonded propyl molecules). For the Pt/Al 2 O 3 catalyst, no noticeable changes were observed in the HERFD-XANES spectra (Fig. 13.7a) during the first reaction. The following O 2 treatment removed the coke and partially reoxidized Pt on the surface. These were fully reduced to metallic Pt upon further reduction in H 2 , however, a more intense white line suggested the sintering of Pt nanoparticles. Successive reactionregeneration cycles were found to result in bigger Pt nanoparticles (confirmed by EXAFS). This growth occurred to a lesser extent on the Sn promoted Pt/Al 2 O 3 catalyst with the Sn thought to prevent the sintering process (Fig. 13.7b). However, it was also noticeable that Sn enrichment of the alloy occurs over multiple cycles, leading to a diminishing dehydrogenation activity overall.
Given the nature of the propane dehydrogenation reaction, whereby varying cycles are required to remove coke and reactivate the catalyst, an operando study is vital to securing information on the behavior of the catalyst under true conditions, which can aid in process efficiency, i.e., by adjusting the length time of each cycle. Concerning the case studies discussed here, we now have an understanding of how coking is linked with the promoting metal and active metal oxidation state (i.e., Mo) and subsequently the catalytic activity. Furthermore, by maintaining the operando method upon regeneration cycles, we now know that the local structure of the active metal varies and also affects the catalytic activity in sequential propane dehydrogenation steps. Not only does the combination of three techniques in one operando XAS setup emphasize the range of possibilities in this system, but it also provides a means to study similar catalytic systems.

Case Study 4: Related Materials

Batteries
Cells, which use chemical transformations as the basis for electrochemical energy storage, are of great interest currently in the rechargeable battery market. Of particular importance is the Li-S battery, which offers up to five times higher energy density than Li-ion batteries. Li-S batteries operate on the basis of lithium dissolution at the anode forming polysulfide salt species (i.e., Li 2 S, Li 2 S 2 , and Li 2 S 3 ) during discharge and plating out on charging [52,53]. However, their poor capacity retention, due to incomplete electrochemical redox, is a major drawback of Li-S batteries. Understanding the nature of polysulfide species formed and their role on affecting the cell capacity is paramount to the further development of Li-S batteries and can only be achieved using real-time operando conditions. XAS offers a powerful spatiotemporal method of studying charge transfer and structural features, both of which are key in electrochemical cycling of electrode materials. Cuisinier et al. [54] report the use of a cathode consisting of "sulfur impregnated in porous hollow-carbon spheres paired with a non-sulfurous electrolyte incorporated in a cell designed to prevent dead zones." Experiments were performed at sector 9-BM-B at the Advanced Photon Source (Argonne National Laboratory, USA) in fluorescence mode. Using operando XANES at the S K-edge, the mechanisms of sulfur redox chemistry during cycling (charge/discharge) were probed. During the charge cycle, S 6
2À is produced at the expense of S 4 2À , propagating "the oxidation of Li 2 S into more stable Li 2 S 6 "(Fig. 13.8a). This coincided with a voltage rise and the final oxidation of S 6 2À to α-S 8 . A noticeable feature of this operando charge cycle is the significant rise in the white line of the S K-edge spectra, accompanied with a disappearance of the low-energy peak associated with the complete conversion of the cathode to sulfur. The discharge cycle leads to many sequential steps (Fig. 13.8a), with the first plateau attributed to disproportionation of S 8 2À . In the second step, elemental sulfur is converted to poly-sulfides (i.e., S 4 6À ). The final reduction step corresponds with a sudden increase in Li 2 S formation, with the total conversion of poly-sulfides resulting in a voltage drop (preventing reduction of remaining sulfur).
It is clear that operando XAS is an excellent method to study and relate what actually happens inside the electrochemical cell and how it performs. Given the varying species formed during each charge and discharge cycle, XAS is one of the best techniques available to observe their oxidation state and local structure. Cell design is of course vital in this case, because in order to obtain true performance analysis, the cell must be as close as possible to a real working system, whilst allowing the simultaneous penetration of X-rays. These results briefly described here, now show the in depth mechanisms of sulfur redox chemistry during cycling, and how these affect the batteries' capacity. Not only can these results be used to enhance the efficiency of Li-S batteries, but operando XAS can be applied to understand and draw links with similar systems, such as cobalt-based batteries.

Sensors
Gas sensors applied to reducing gases are traditionally based on porous SnO 2 , with noble metals such as Au, Pd, and Pt added to enhance the sensitivity/stability and decrease the operation temperature [56][57][58][59]. However, the role of the additive in lowering the operation temperature for instance is not well understood. Theories such as "spill-over" ("enriching surface of support with reactive species") or "Fermi-level control" ("change in stoichiometry/chemical state of the noble metal/metal oxide") mechanisms are put forward, assuming the additive is in its metallic or oxidized form at the surface of the porous matrix [55]. A major flaw in these postulations is that nearly all studies are performed on "model" samples (higher weight loading of additive than realistically used) and in "idealized" conditions (realistic conditions are: 30-200 ppm H 2 ; 10-50 ppm CO/air, 200 or 300 C). Operando XAS with simultaneous monitoring of the sensor response (by DC resistance measurements), offers a valuable method to explore the structure and oxidation state of the noble metal additive. Although the porous SnO 2 matrix is heavily absorbing, and the content of the metal in question is extremely low, Koziej et al. presented the use of a specially designed in situ cell (Fig. 13.8b) at ID26 beamline, ESRF [55]. The sensitive layer inside the cell is 50 μm thick, 3.5 mm wide and 7 mm long, with a Pt heater contributing to controlled temperatures of 50-400 C. Samples containing 0.2 wt% (realistic), 2 and 3 wt% (model) Pd-SnO 2 powders were employed under the following conditions: "30-125 ppm H 2 in dry and humid air; 10-50 ppm CO in air; 1000 ppm H 2 in He and 50 ppm O 2 " [55]. Both XANES and EXAFS indicated the presence of fully oxidized Pd in an atomic distribution included in the SnO 2 lattice in the 0.2 wt% Pd-SnO 2 powder, with palladium oxide particles present in the 2 wt% Pd-SnO 2 sample. During exposure to CO and H 2 , high sensor readings were recorded for 0.2 wt% Pd-SnO 2 , with no change in the Pd oxidation state. However, slightly reduced Pd-particles were found to form in the 3 wt% Pd-SnO 2 sensor. These results ruled the previous "spill-over" and "Fermi-level" mechanisms invalid, as these are based on metallic or oxidized Pd at the surface of SnO 2 , with the role of Pd more likely to be due to binding to the surface lattice oxygen, "providing sites for oxygen adsorption" and "reaction with reducing gases mostly taking place on the surface of SnO 2 " [55].
Given that previous studies were focused on samples under idealistic conditions and/or on model catalysts, the information provided by operando XAS here is evidently valuable to enhancing our understanding of the mechanistic aspects of gas sensors. We are now able to observe the oxidation state of the noble metal as well as the metal oxide during true sensing conditions. Understanding the gas sensing mechanism has important advantages in the development of future sensing materials.

Fuel Cells
Fuel cells in the form of proton-exchange-membranes (PEMs) are widely thought as replacements to current environmentally damaging automobile systems [60][61][62]. However, at the moment, they are not realizing their potential due to their inadequate durability. Traditional PEMs consist of a membrane electrode assembly (MEA) which has a "stacked structure consisting of an anode catalyst layer, a proton-conducting membrane electrolyte, and a cathode catalyst layer" [63]. Here protons and electrons are formed from the conversion of hydrogen on a metal catalyst at the anode catalyst surface. Each proton moves via the proton-conducting membrane to the surface of the cathode catalyst. Protons and molecular oxygen react to produce water on a supported Pt-based catalyst. A major drawback of such a system however is in the dissolution (deactivation) of Pt under realistic operating conditions. This occurs during "power-on-off" processes (voltage change of 1.0-0.4 V), forming rapid (few seconds) electrochemical reactions on the electrode surfaces. Therefore, a thorough investigation into the chemistry at the electrode surface, during real operation conditions (sequential voltage changes), is needed to improve their durability. Combining XAS with an online potentiostat, structureperformance relationships can be obtained on a MEA fuel cell under real operating conditions. Tada et al. measured such a system at the BL01 station at Spring-8 (JASRI) on a Pt/C cathode catalyst and Pt-free Pd/C anode catalyst stacked between two current collectors [64]. In order to record information of such rapid changes in voltage, a novel Time-Gating Quick XAFS (TG-QXAFS) technique was employed (1 s time resolution), with typical XAFS being too slow (15 s due to rotation of the monochromator). In other words, QXAFS measured over a 15 s period are recorded, divided into 15 parts of 1 s intervals, and combined into one interval. During the Pt reduction (voltage stepping: 1.0 to >0.4 V) and oxidation (0.4 to >1.0 V) processes under a N 2 atmosphere, it was discovered that a "hysteresis loop for the structural changes in the Pt cathode particles" exist (Fig. 13.9) [64]. During oxidation of Pt, Pt-OH covalent bonds form on the surface of the Pt particles, due to several electron transfer processes, which each have significant time lags between one another. The reduction process also experienced a similar time lag, but with a different reaction mechanism involving two intermediate phases (Pt-O dissociation and coordinated OH ions accumulation of electric charge of the Pt particles). Finally, increasing the voltage to 1.4 V and performing repeated voltage-stepping, did not lead to Pt ions dissolving in the electrolyte under a N 2 atmosphere. However, in air, Pt-Pt bonds immediately break and dissolution of Pt ions gradually occurs when electric potential accumulates on the electrode surface.
In 2012, the group of Tada et al. made another breakthrough in the field of operando XAS on MEA-based polymer electrolyte fuel cells (PEFCs) [63]. Using similar operation conditions to their previous work (voltage cycling of 0.4-1.0 V) [64], Ishiguro et al. employed a Pt 3 Co/C cathode catalyst to observe the structural kinetics of surface events taking place [63]. Operando time-resolved QXAFS at the Pt L III -edge and Co K-edge were analyzed at 500 ms intervals, revealing "ten rate constants of the dynamic surface events," which were significantly higher for the Pt 3 Co/C catalyst compared to those of the Pt/C catalyst, providing an enhanced fuel-cell performance and durability. This was associated with a greater increase in the rate constants attributed to "reduction processes of Pt-O bond breaking, Pt-Pt bond reformation, and change in the charge density of Pt," with the addition of Co to Pt.
The determination of the origin of surface adsorbates and even their coverage during the operation of a fuel cell has provided new insights into the kinetic and mechanistic aspects during working conditions. Using an operando XAS technique,

Conclusions and Future Perspectives
The significant interest in operando XAS studies since the start of the twenty first century, together with the continuing development of proper spectroscopic-reaction cells and advancements in synchrotron facilities able to perform such experiments, has paved the way to enhancing our understanding of important reaction systems. Under our definition of operando XAS, whereby the simultaneous online analysis of performance is coupled with chemical/physical information obtained using XAS, we have provided a glance at several current systems available in the field of heterogeneous catalysis, as well as in batteries, sensors, and fuel cells (Fig. 13.2), and how they are furthering our knowledge in these important areas of research.
Given the topic of heterogeneous catalysis as an example, ex situ and in situ XAS studies do not provide sufficient detailed insight into the molecular-level structure-activity (performance) relationships during true working conditions. This is due to a number of factors, but is mainly due to the absence of the relevant reaction environment that the catalyst actually operates under, when in a real reactor. Operando XAS provides a means to form such experiments and conclusions, but is considered highly complex, due to the multiple time and/or length scales that have to be monitored.
The case studies we describe in this chapter show that such obstacles can be overcome to a large extent, and provide new information that is furthering our understanding of how these functional materials operate, which can lead to better process efficiency for example. Although online analysis of the performance is necessary for operando XAS experiments, it is clear that a combination of multiple techniques (not only XAS), such as UV-Vis, Raman and FT-IR spectroscopy are also required to form the complete picture of the chemical and physical processes taking place. One of the focal points of each case study in this chapter (in terms of obtaining such operando XAS systems) is in the design of the spectroscopicreaction cell. Depending on the true reaction conditions required, together with the information desired, the reactor cell plays a pivotal role in allowing for instance harsh reaction conditions (i.e., high pressure/temperature) accompanied by X-ray and spectroscopic working parameters.
The crucial information obtained in each case study points towards the vast advantage operando XAS has over ex situ and in situ studies. However, we are still only at the beginning of our development of operando XAS systems. Further enhancements in obtaining spatiotemporal information is desperately required in order to gather greater insight into intermediate species formed on for example the catalyst surface during operating conditions. The studies of Gonzalez-Jimenez et al. [30], Cats et al. [29], and Tada et al. [64] already give us a glimpse of the possibilities available in improving space and time scales, respectively. The use of techniques such as X-ray microscopy and Time-Gating Quick XAFS (TG-QXAFS) can provide remarkable information on the scale of ~30 nm and 1 s time-resolution, respectively. These recent developments in collecting spatiotemporal spectroscopic information are also game changing in terms of data analysis methods. While traditional XAS evaluation methods focused on the detailed analysis of individual absorption spectra, such an approach becomes unfeasible in the case of, for example, spectroscopic TXM data consisting of several millions of XANES. Therefore, future evaluation procedures in both operando and in situ spectroscopy will, even more than today, have to include advanced statistical evaluation methods like multivariate analysis of the whole, multidimensional data matrix. While multivariate analysis is an established, versatile tool for the analysis of spectroscopic data collected with a single technique, it holds the promise of applying it to multi-technique data, i.e., evaluating simultaneously recorded spectroscopic data as one hyperdimensional data set. This approach would complete operando spectroscopy in the true sense of the definition given in the introduction-from data collection to data evaluation-and provide an unbiased basis for interpreting correlations between the many, varying parameters of interest in an operando experiment.
Therefore, the continued development of reactor cell design, enhanced dataanalysis, coupled with the development of advanced techniques to improve spatiotemporal resolution, is vital in order to form an arsenal to apply operando XAS on a wider scale to more interesting and complex systems. To obtain XAFS data with a good signal-to-noise ratio (S/N), we should use an edge height (Δμt) of nearly 1 and a total absorbance (μ t t) of less than 3-4. The total absorbance is the sum of the absorbance of the target X-ray absorption edge μ a t and the background absorbance (μ b t) arising from other elements and the other edges, and is given as
For a dilute sample, μ t t may exceed 5 if one tries to keep the edge height approximately 1, owing to the large μ b t. This results in a decreased transmitted beam and a much poorer S/N spectrum. In such a case, the edge height may be reduced even if the thickness increases, owing to higher harmonics and/or stray light preventing the reliable acquisition of data. It should be noted that one has to reduce the thickness to keep the total absorbance less than 3-4 even if Δμt is less than 1 to obtain a better XAFS. With the bright beam source, we can achieve a good S/N ratio XAFS spectra even if the edge jump is 0.1. For more dilute systems, the fluorescence detection method is often applied.
The sample is irradiated with higher energy X-rays than the energy of the X-ray absorption edge. The photoabsorption yields emission of a photoelectron and the creation of the core hole left at the target atom. The created core hole is usually relaxed by the transition of an electron from the outer shell accompanied by Auger electron emission or by fluorescence X-ray radiation to liberate the extra energy between the outer shell electron and core electron, as shown in Fig. 14.1.
The fluorescence intensity is proportional to the number of core holes, which is then proportional to the absorption coefficient of the target element. When the target element is randomly distributed in the sample, the intensity of the fluorescence signal can be expressed as:
where, I f , I(x), and I(0) are the intensities of the fluorescence X-ray with the incident X-rays at positions x and 0, respectively. As mentioned above μ t can be divided into two parts, μ a and the background μ b , and L is the sample thickness. When the target element is present in a thin film, the equation can be written as (thin film case):
If L is sufficiently thick and the target element is very dilute (extremely dilute case) then:
In only the thin film or extremely dilute cases, the I f is proportional to μ a , the absorption coefficient of the target edge. Otherwise, I f is not proportional to μ a because μ changes with μ a as it contains EXAFS oscillations. Consequently, fluorescence EXAFS is distorted especially in its amplitude. This is termed the "self-absorption effect" and the fluorescence method cannot be applied. Hence, a dilute sample is suitable for the fluorescence method.  Pt fluorescence appears when the incidence X-ray energy is more than the energy of the Pt L 3 -edge. There are peaks at higher energies corresponding to the elastic scattering of incoming X-rays and Compton scattering. At lower energies than the Pt fluorescence, fluorescence peaks arising from other coexisting element (Fe) are observed.
The detection limit is determined by these background X-rays even if one uses a strong X-ray source. Since EXAFS exhibits a 1 % modulation in absorbance for the absorption edge height, a fluorescence of at least more than 10 4 counts is needed to obtain a S/N >1 when only the fluorescence signal is detected (or no background X-ray is present; the signal is 100 ¼ 10 4 Â 1 % and noise ¼ ffiffiffiffiffiffiffi 10 4 p ¼ 100). If the fluorescence intensity is 10 4 cps, 1 s of accumulation will enable a signal with S/N ¼ 1 and 100 s (10 6 counts) is necessary for a sufficient S/N ratio (10 3 ) to obtain a reliable XAFS oscillation.
However, the situation changes when the fluorescence intensity is the same but background components are present. If the background intensity is 10 5 cps, the fluorescence is 10 4 cps, and we want to measure the EXAFS with a S/N ¼ 1, at least 10 s is required because EXAFS oscillation ¼ 10 4 (cps) Â 10 (s) Â 1 % ¼ 1000 while the noise ¼ ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffi
necessary, a collection time of 10 7 s (7 years) is required. This means that when the background level is high, the EXAFS measurement is not possible even though the fluorescence signal is enough. Importantly, the noise is proportional to the square root of the total intensity and not to that of signal. To reduce the measuring time, the background has to be removed and the signal should be detected more effectively so that an energy selective fluorescence measurement is required.

Lytle Detector [1]
The strongest background contribution is from elastic scattering X-rays which have the same photon energy as the incident X-rays, while the fluorescence X-rays have a lower photon energy than the elastic signal, as shown in Fig. 14.2. Amount of detected elastic scattering X-rays can be easily reduced by the combination of a low pass filter and a Soller slit. As the low-pass filter, the Z-1 element is used, where Z is the atomic number of the target element. The Z-1 filter usually has an absorption edge between the fluorescence signal and the absorption edge, as shown in Fig. 14.3. For example, Ni fluorescence appears around 7460 eV while its K-absorption edge is observed at 8333 eV. The Z-1 element for Ni is Co, whose K-edge is 7709 eV. Thus, Co strongly absorbs the elastic scattering X-rays but weakly absorbs the fluorescence signal from the target element (Ni). However, the elastic scattering X-ray excites the Z-1 filter to result in the fluorescence of the Z-1 element, which may reach the detector to increase the background signal. Since the emission positions from the Z-1 filter and sample are different, the fluorescence from the Z-1 filter can effectively be removed by the Soller slit which has a focus on the sample, as shown in Fig. 14.4. A previous report explains how to make the Z-1 filter [2]. The Z-1 material, with appropriate thickness (edge jump normally 3 or 6), is hardened by glue and is made flat. In a moderately dilute sample (more than a few hundred ppm), the large area ionization chamber enables a large solid angle whilst the ionization chamber itself has no energy resolution. The combination of the Z-1 filter and the Soller slit is mandatory to achieve a good S/N ratio in the Lytle detector. The detector system is called a Lytle detector [1]. Figure 14.5 shows the Pt L 3 -edge XAFS with a 200 ppm solution. In the L edge, the low-pass filter is not the Z-1, but instead, K-edge elements is chosen whose absorption edge is located between the absorption edge for the target element and its fluorescence. In the case of Pt, three K-edge elements are available, Ge, Ga, and Zn. In Fig. 14.5, Ga was used as the low-pass filter.

Pulse Counting Detectors
For more dilute systems, the background signal becomes larger and energy resolved fluorescence detection is required. There are several energy-resolved detectors, such as solid state detectors (SSDs), silicon drift detectors (SDDs), gas proportional detectors (GPDs), or scintillation detectors (SDs), as shown in Table 14.1.
The energy resolution can be achieved by the pulse counting and the pulse height analysis (PHA). When the photon enters the counter, the electron and hole pairs are both created in the semiconductor detectors (SSDs and SDDs). The valence electrons are excited to the conduction bands. The band gap is 1.1 eV for Si and 0.7 eV  for Ge; hence, many electrons are excited by one X-ray photon. The number of excited electrons is proportional to the X-ray photon energy. These electrons accumulate to the electrodes to create one electric pulse from one X-ray photon. Consequently, the electric pulse height is proportional to the incoming X-ray energy. In the GPDs, gases are ionized to create electron and ion pair. The ionization energy of Ar is 30 eV giving a lot of electron and ion pairs, which are converted to an electric current pulse at the electrode. In the SDs, X-rays are converted to visible light where the number of photons is proportional to the X-ray energies and the photons are converted to electrons and finally one electric pulse. The important point is that the final electric pulse height is proportional to the X-ray photon energy. The PHA of each electric pulse created from the detector provides the photon energy information. Since the number of electric pulses for each energy is proportional to the number of X-ray photons, the X-ray intensity (number of X-ray photons) is determined by counting the electric pulses. This method is called the pulse counting method, which is in contrast to the Lytle detector with an ionization chamber, where the pulses are integrated to be a direct current (DC).
The merit of the pulse counting method is the energy resolution, which enables us to distinguish between the fluorescence and the elastic scattering. Its drawback is the counting loss when too many pulses enter the detector. Since each pulse has a finite pulse width, two X-ray photons cannot be distinguished when the two X-ray photons arrive at almost the same time. When two pulses simultaneously enter the detector, one signal pulse will be created with its height being the sum of the energy of two photons. Thus, the PHA is not able to identify the pulse as the fluorescence signal and the two pulses cannot be counted. The time that the detector is unable to distinguish between two pulses is called the dead time. If the counting rate is too high, the detector becomes saturated, so the detector should be placed far away from the sample to reduce the total number of pulses and to prevent the saturation of the detector. Note that the counting loss depends not only on the fluorescence but also on the total number of pulses. This means that the intensity of background X-rays (mainly elastic scattering X-rays) has to be small. The pulse counting system is often used with the combination of the low-pass filter and the Soller slit to remove the elastic scattering X-rays.
When the counting rate is not too high, the counting rate loss can be corrected. The counting rate loss equation is given as follows [3],
where m 0 , m are the true and observed photon counts of the fluorescence X-rays (selected signal). The n, τ 1 , and τ 2 are total number of X-rays (termed as the ICR (input count rate) or CRM (count rate meter)), and the dead times for the fluorescence X-rays and total X-rays, respectively. τ 1 and τ 2 are determined by a fitting using the following equations:
where β is another fitting parameter. Table 14.1 summarizes the maximum measurable counting rate, energy resolution, and solid angle for each detector [4,5]. SSDs have the highest energy resolution although the maximum counting rate is small and its dead time loss is large. Figure 14.6 shows the EXAFS spectra of 50 ppm Pt dissolved in CCl 4 using the SSD and low pass (Ge )filter þ Soller slit. The dead time correction has been applied. The multi-element SSD is usually used to increase the solid angle and to overcome the dead time loss problem [6]. Cramer et al. measured the XAFS using 13 Ge detectors clustered in a 1:3:5:3:1 pattern [6]. The counting rate reached 75.000 cps. Oyanagi et al. developed a 100 elements SSD detector (Ge pixel array detector) and obtained counting rates of up to 10 7 cps [7]. Another problem for SSDs is that the SSDs require liquid N 2 for operation. Recently, a SDD has been used for the fluorescence XAFS measurements and exhibited a high energy resolution with smaller dead time losses [8]. In addition, this detector does not require liquid N 2 cooling, but can be operated using Peltier cooling. A CdTe detector also has a high counting rate and does not require liquid N 2 , but the energy resolution is poor. However the miniaturization of the CdTe detector is possible and it can be positioned close to the sample [9].
When the sample is more dilute or contains other elements and impurities, higher energy resolution is needed. The superconducting tunnel junction detector provides a high energy resolution detector with 10-15 eV and can be applied to the fluorescence XAFS measurements for low Z elements [10,11]. However, the counting rate is not so high.

Fluorescence Spectroscopy [12]
Another method for detection in an ultra-dilute system is to use a monochromator to separate the fluorescence of the target element from the other signals. The flat crystal requires a parallel beam to select the fluorescence beam. The Soller slit is used to collimate the X-ray beam, but this results in the loss of many X-rays. Recently, a half-focus polycapillary tube has been used for collecting and collimating the X-rays from the sample, as shown in Fig. 14.7 [13]. The polycapillary is an optical device composed of curved glass tubes in which the X-rays are totally reflected by the glass walls and guided along the tube, as shown in Fig. 14.7. Because the tubes are curved (Fig. 14.7b), the dispersed X-rays are collected in parallel beams through the bundle of the glass capillary tubes (Fig. 14.7c). The collecting angle from the sample was reported as 20 with an angle divergence of 3.4 mrad [13]. Thus, the energy resolution for Si (111) as a monochromator was 40 eV at 7.1 keV and 10 eV at 3.5 keV. The detection limit was reported to be tens of ppm [13]. Figure 14.8 shows the X-ray emissions from the submicrometer order pigments of the old painting [13]. The main ingredient is Pb. A small amount of sulfur was included. Pb Mα (2345.5 eV) and S Kα (2308 eV) fluorescence peaks had the similar energies. Figure 14.8a shows the emission spectrum analyzed by the capillary tube and flat monochromator where S and Pb fluorescence were well separated, while the SDD is unable to separate the fluorescence, as shown in Fig. 14.8b.
When the curved monochromator is used, the X-ray can be collected and refocused on the detector side using a Johan-or Johansson-type crystal, details of which will be in the section of this book discussing the high energy resolution. Sokaras et al. used 40 Johan-type spherically bent Si(1 1 0) crystals to achieve 0.019 of 4π sr rad [14,15]. To increase the solid angle, a barrel-type monochromator was developed, as shown in Fig. 14.9 [16].
In a Johan-or Johansson-type monochromator, the monochromator surface is on or approximately on the Rowland circle. The other configuration of the monochromator is a log spiral where the angle between the line from one point to the surface and surface normal is a constant [17]. Thus, a log spirally curved monochromator in both Bragg or Laue cases can be used as a crystal analyzer.
The log spiral curve is a curve written as:
where r, ϕ are the distance and the angle in the polar coordinates, respectively, as shown in Fig. 14.10. The log spiral curve has a feature that the angle, θ, between the radial direction, r , and surface normal, ñ, is constant.
When b ¼ 0, the log spiral is a circle. If θ is the Bragg angle, the diffraction occurs at all points on the curve. Therefore, the X-ray coming from the one spot satisfies the Bragg condition for all points on the log spiral surface, as shown in Fig. 14.10a [17]. From Eq. (14.9), b should be AE tan θ. The curve is energy dependent and the dynamic control of its curvature is necessary to change the energy [18]. In this case, 4 eV energy resolution at 10 keV was reported [18]. Figure 14.10b shows the Laue type log spiral analyzer [19,20]. The X-ray from the point source is diffracted to the other side of the crystal. To increase the acceptance angle, an asymmetrically cut crystal monochromator is usually used. The log spiral shape is written as:
where θ B and χ are the Bragg angle and an asymmetrical angle, respectively. The asymmetrical angle is an angle between the crystal surface normal and the crystal plane. The incident X-ray angle against the surface normal, θ, is written as follows, which is constant for all log spiral surfaces:
The X-rays are dispersed from the imaginary focal point on the sample side. The Soller slit parallel to the monochromatized X-ray direction can select the certain energy to satisfy the Bragg conditions. The Laue type log spiral analyzer is now commercially available, and is known as the bent crystal Laue analyzer (BCLA) [19]. In principle, it can collect fluorescence X-rays of about 0.1 sr from the sample. An energy resolution of approximately 14 eV was reported in the 8 keV region [21]. Takahashi et al. used the BCLA for the analysis of minerals [22][23][24][25]. Natural minerals are composed of several elements with different concentrations which may interrupt and hinder the fluorescence signal of the target element existing in a low concentration. They measured XAFS spectra of about 10 ppm Os in molybdenite by using the BCLA where the Zn impurity hinders the Os L 3 -edge measurement when an SSD was used [24].
The lower limit of the surface XAFS is determined by the bulk X-ray background. The total reflection is one way to increase the surface sensitivity. However, it requires a large flat surface area as discussed in the other section. A crystal analyzer may be another possible choice to increase the lower limit. We have applied the BCLA to Pt on highly oriented pyrolytic graphite( HOPG ). The Pt density on HOPG was 10 15 cm À2 . Figure 14.11 shows XAFS spectra of Pt on one side of a very thin HOPG surface used as a model electrode for the fuel cell. HOPG was used as an X-ray window and electrode for the model fuel cell which allowed us to carry out in situ spectroscopy. The sample was illuminated through the HOPG and the fluorescence signal from Pt was measured again through the HOPG. We named the measurement system back-illuminated fluorescence X-ray absorption fine structure (BI-FXAFS) [15]. One can measure the XAFS signal by using a low-pass filter (usually a Z-1 filter) and an SSD in air, as shown in Fig. 14.11, where the scattering from the thin HOPG and air are negligible. However, when the electrolyte solution present was in contact with the Pt particle to carry out in-situ measurements under the electrochemical conditions, the signal was hardly observed because of the strong scattering coming from the solution. The large background arising from scattering X-rays masked the fluorescence signal even if the low-pass filter and SSD were used, as shown in Fig. 14.11. We rarely observed an edge jump. However, Figure 14.11c shows the spectrum of the same sample with the BCLA set between the sample and the SSD detector. The clear edge jump was observed so that the crystal analyzer could improve the detection limit to allow us to investigate the monolayer (1014 cm À2 ) sample on the surface. High brilliant focused beam will provide much better XAFS signal.

Summary
To investigate a small amount of a sample, one may use the fluorescence XAFS method which improves the S/N ratio. The detection limit is determined by the background X-rays, such as elastic scattering X-ray, Compton scattering, and fluorescence X-rays from other elements. Exploiting the energy difference of the fluorescence X-rays, one can selectively separate the fluorescence X-rays from other background X-rays. The fluorescence X-rays of the target element can be elucidated by a low-pass filter, the energy resolved detectors (SSDs, SDDs, GPDs, and SCs), and a crystal monochromator. The crystal monochromator has the merit of high resolution. The development of high brilliant photon sources to provide a small spot size will enable the fluorescence method with a crystal monochromator to be used on a practical level for low concentration samples.

Chapter 15
Reflection XAFS Francesco d'Acapito

Introduction
"Reflection XAFS" or "ReflEXAFS" is a particular collection mode of X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) data with the probe beam impinging on the sample in total external reflection conditions. The main advantage of total reflection XAS is that the extinction length of the probe beam is greatly reduced respect to the normal incidence as shown in Fig. 15.1: This makes ReflEXAFS a surface-sensitive technique in the range of a few nm with the considerable advantage that it does not need ultrahigh vacuum conditions like electron-based techniques. Then, this method can be applied to a variety of interfaces (gas-solid, liquid-solid, liquid-liquid, and solid-solid) realizing "in operando" conditions for the materials under study. The toll to pay is the size of the sample that needs to be quite long in the beam direction in order to intercept a sufficient portion of the beam when placed in total reflection condition.
In this contribution the basic theoretical aspects of this technique are reviewed and then a list of remarkable experimental apparatuses is presented. Successively, some examples of experiments using total reflection XAS are described, and in the final section some perspectives of development of this technique are given.

Principles of Reflection XAFS
Reflection XAS (also called GIXAFS or ReflEXAFS) is based on the total external reflection of X-rays at the interface between two media where the deeper one possesses the highest electronic density. If the impinging (probe) beam shines the material below a given angle (the critical angle, ϕ c ) it is completely reflected and enters in the medium only for an extremely thin layer. This is an optical phenomenon widely observed also in the visible range; the difference here is that, in the case of an interface vacuum-material, the former plays the role of the "highdensity" medium. The phenomenon can be understood by considering the refraction index of an idealized system consisting in electrons (mass m e charge q e ) bound to the nuclei via a harmonic potential (spring constant k i ). Neglecting dissipation, the equation of motion of electrons i responding to an external field E 0 at angular frequency ω is m e € x þ κ i x ¼ q e E 0 e iωt [1], and it can be demonstrated that such a system generates the following refraction index:
À ω 2 where i is the sum over all the electrons and N the atomic volume density and α the polarizability. When the energy of the X-rays is sufficiently high that most of electrons are above their resonance frequencies they will respond in antiphase respect to the field (and similarly will do the α) and the resulting refraction index will exhibit a real part slightly less than 1. This and total reflection (lower curve) and a reduction of about four orders of magnitude of the extinction length is evidenced in total reflection. From Ref. [44] means that the phase velocity in the medium is higher than the speed of light in the vacuum and the medium acts as if it had a lower electronic density than vacuum. In a more complete treatment [3] the refraction index can be written as n ¼ 1 À δ À iβ where β and δ come from the scattering factors (in particular it holds that β ¼ λμ 4π , being λ the X-ray wavelength and μ the absorption coefficient) and they are linked by the Kramers-Kronig (KK
Using the Fresnel formulas for modeling of refraction at an interface a complete description of the reflection can be given in homogeneous as well as on stratified media. Defining
the reflectivity R expressed as the ratio between the moduli of the impinging and reflected electric fields is
. For sake of simplicity, it is recalled here just some basic simple formulas as the expression of the critical angle as ϕ c ¼ ffiffiffiffiffi 2δ p and the extinction length z 1/e of the refracted beam in case of small incidence angle and negligible absorption
. Being δ is a quantity of about 10 À5 , ϕ c is in the order of a few mrad and z 1/e around a few nm.
When considering β and δ functions in a condensed system it is clear that the former quantity contains both an atomic background β 0 plus the features coming from the photo-electron interference in the expression of the absorption coefficient (XAS effect) Δβ. Similarly happens for δ in virtue of the KK relation with β. Thus, the reflectivity R as a function of the photon energy E will contain the XAS features, making possible an investigation of surfaces within a range of a few nm under the surface. On the other hand, the analysis of the data appears to be extremely complex due to the nontrivial relationship between R(E) and the quantities β and δ (also known under the name of "anomalous dispersion effects").

Data Analysis Methods
The first observation of XAS features in a reflectivity spectrum was carried out by Barchewitz et al. [4] and soon after Martens and Rabe [5][6][7] pointed out the presence of both β and δ contributions in R and that for data collection below the critical angle the β-XAS dominated in R whereas well above f c the δ-XAS dominates. They also defined a method for extracting the pure β contribution from a spectrum collected at any angle by considering the atomic and oscillating parts
linking the two. Considering, however, that the more interesting applications of ReflEXAFS are taken well below the critical angle (ϕ ( ϕ c ) Bosio et al. [8] and Poumellec et al. [9] proposed an approximated method for the treatment of data collected in that condition valid for the case of the semi-infinite solid. In the case of small incidence angle the following relation between β and R holds:
1þR where X has the same definition as above. Starting with an initial value for δ a first approximation of β is derived, Then, with a Kramers-Kronig transformation KK{β } a second function δ is found that generates β . Carrying out this procedure several times a self-consistent solution is rapidly found.
Following the way traced in Ref. [5][6][7], Borthen and Strehblow (BS) [10,11] defined a further method based on the expression of the oscillating part of the reflectivity χ R (E) as a linear combination
ð Þwith the a and b coefficients to be calculated on a model system. All these methods were applicable to semi-infinite solids whereas it was recognized the necessity of treating also the more general case of layered systems. The first formulation of a method permitting the analysis of this class of samples was presented by Heald et al. [12][13][14] and was based on the expression of the total (i.e., including possible additional layers) R(E) (or even the fluorescence, F(E)) as a sum of two contributions one β-dependent and the other δ-dependent. This latter part was estimated from a partial derivative ΔR/Δβ Â Δβ/Δδ where this last factor was identified as bearing a phase factor of about 75-80 (compared with 90 previously estimated by Martens and Rabe). Based on similar principles is also the method proposed by Tani et al. [15] where the function Δβ/Δδ is determined via an iterative cycle. An extension of this method applied to layered systems has been recently proposed by Lopez-Flores et al. [16] where the R(E) quantity is obtained in a matrix form involving the partial derivatives of R respect to β and δ relative to each layer of the sample.
In the years 2000 together with the interest to layered systems the problem of correctly including the surface roughness become the subject of investigations [17]. Already Martens and Rabe [ vi-vii ] have underlined the importance of this parameter in the ReflEXAFS data analysis and a series of papers [18][19][20] have addressed in detail this aspect also considering the Distorted Wave Born Approximation (DWBA) [21], as a possible alternative theory respect to Fresnel's. In these papers it was recognized the importance of considering the surface roughness mainly for possible artifacts affecting the signal amplitude [22] and that a treatment using Parratt's (Fresnel) formulas corrected by a Ne ´vot-Croce (NC) [22] roughness parameter gave the same results as the more complex DWBA model in the case of specular reflection. However, the use of DWBA permitted the elaboration of a variant of the ReflEXAFS technique based on the off-specular reflected beam, i.e., collecting the data on the so-called Yoneda peak [23]. Non specular effects, are not included in the Parratt's formalism, but can be obtained from DWBA and this opens the opportunity of a new experimental technique with increased sensitivity to the interfaces in the sample presenting the higher degree of lateral heterogeneities [24]. In these papers the quantitative XAS analysis was carried out with a (BS) method.
Benzi et al. [25] (as also suggested in Ref. [26]) have proposed a code (CARD) [27] that works in an opposite way respect to the previously mentioned methods.
Instead of converting R(E) in a b(E) for successive analysis with conventional tools they proposed the use of modified XAS theoretical paths for modeling the oscillating part of R(E). In practice, the relevant reflectivity parameters (layers thickness, roughness, composition) of the sample are determined by fitting one or more reflectivity spectra at fixed energy (and variable angle ϕ) of the sample. With these parameters, the reflectivity R(E) of the sample is simulated including one at a time the theoretical EXAFS paths generated by a suitable code (Feff in the present version of the code). From this reflectivity function a new theoretical EXAFS signal is extracted and can be used for the data analysis. In this case the full Fresnel (with NC corrections for roughness) formulas are used with no additional approximations also in the case of layered systems. [28] Up to here it has been treated the case where the optical constants of the absorbing species contribute significantly to the refraction index of the probed layer (concentrated sample case). In the case of very thin film this is no longer the case: the optical constant of the probed layer is dominated by the matrix and do not exhibit edge jump nor XAS oscillations in the region investigated (diluted sample case). In this case the reflectivity signal does not possess any XAS modulation and fluorescence detection must be used. (Actually, fluorescence could be used also in the analysis of thick samples but it was long ago pointed out [29] that reflectivity has a greater surface sensitivity in case of rough samples) The great advantage in this case is that it can be demonstrated that no corrections are necessary and the collected data can be treated in the conventional way [30,31].

Data Collection Methods and Instrumentation
ReflEXAFS is an ideal technique in the study of surface systems especially when real conditions for the surface are required. Coupled with the highly polarized beams coming from synchrotrons, this technique provides a detailed description of well oriented samples. This, because the polarization vector can be oriented either parallel or perpendicular to the surface (linear dichroism) so enhancing the sensitivity to bonds placed along that vector. This effect is different if {K, L (I) } or {L (II) , L (III) } edges are considered. In the former case the relation between the amplitude N Kedge of a single bond making an angle δ with the polarization vector is N Kedge ¼ 3 cos 2 δ whereas in the latter case it is N Ledge ¼ 0:7 þ 0:9 * cos 2 δ [32]. This technique has been called polarization dependent total reflection XAFS (PTRF-XAFS) [33] and has been largely exploited by the catalysis community to describe adsorbate on model surfaces. Another aspect that can be exploited using total reflection is the large variation of the extinction length of the probe X-ray beam as a function of the incidence angle. This value passes from a few nm to a few mm so giving the possibility of studying the surface and the bulk of the sample just by changing the incidence angle from below to above the critical value. An example of these surface-bulk studies can be found in Ref. [34] and others are presented later.
Several experimental apparatuses for ReflEXAFS data collection have been presented in the past. A noticeable instrument is that presented in Ref. [33,35,36] describing a measurement chamber coupled with a preparation chamber for in situ studies and installed at the BL-7 beamline at KEK dedicated to studies in the fields of chemistry and catalysis. The samples could be kept at a pressure variable form ultrahigh vacuum (10 À9 mbar) to ambient pressure and at a temperature from 100 to 800 K. The sample was conditioned in the preparation chamber and successively transferred in the measurement chamber. Here, it could be oriented with the surface either parallel or perpendicular to the beam polarization vector so permitting the collection of PTRF-XAFS data on systems like Pt particles on Al 2 O 3 (0001) or V on ZrO 2 (100) surfaces (see following sections). Be windows permitted to collect the reflected and fluorescence beams with ion chamber or NaI detectors. Successively, an evolution of that instrument was presented by the same group [37] with more a better performing multielement solid state energy resolving detector and a more complete set of ancillary surface characterization techniques (Auger, RHEED). A measure chamber with similar capabilities of data collection with different sample orientation was presented in Ref. [38,39] and installed at the BL13B beamline at the Photon Factory. The chamber was more conceived for experiments in the surface science field and permitted to collect data in multiple sample orientations in ultrahigh vacuum and temperatures between 15 and 300 K. Also in this case particular care was used in the choice of the fluorescence detector as both Si (Li) and HP-Ge multielement devices were used to reach sensitivity of about 0.1 Monolayer. Further data collection apparatuses have been presented in literature some of which keeping the sample kept in the ambient environment or with the sample stage mounted on a multiaxis diffractometer [40][41][42] whereas in others the sample manipulator is entirely confined in a vacuum chamber to limit the effects of air absorption or scattering [43,44].
A particular challenging topic was constituted by ReflEXAFS on liquid surfaces. In this case indeed, the need of keeping a well stable surface free from ripples and other mechanical instabilities lead to the realization of peculiar experimental apparatuses. The first aspect is that the impinging beam needs to be tilted instead of the sample so the sample stage is preceded by a flat mirror that bends the beam at the desired angular value. Angle variable reflectivity is measured changing at the same time the angle of the mirror and the height of the sample to keep the beam at its center. The issue of ripples at the liquid surfaces is solved by using vibration damping solutions like a floating sample boat placed in a pool filled with a damping liquid [45,46]. A further apparatus for liquid surfaces is reported in Ref. [47] operative at the DELTA storage ring and equipped with a Langmuir trough for the formation in situ of Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) films.
An activity that has been growing in importance in the last years has been that coupling time resolved XAS techniques like Quick-XAS or dispersive XAS with total reflection studies with the aim of describing in time the evolution of surfaces. Using Quick-XAS [48,49] it has been reported the capability of collecting data below 1 s in a widely extended k space, whereas dispersive XAS opens the way to much shorter collection time (4-10 ms) although paid with a more limited extension of the spectrum [50].
A final remark is to be done on methods based on the standing waves generated in multilayer systems. In this case it was demonstrated the feasibility of data collection keeping the standing wave in the same position respect to the layers during the whole energy scan [51] so opening the possibility of data collection enhancing either the interfaces or the central portions of the layers. Also from the modulations of the position of a multilayer Bragg peak as a function of the energy (coming from the d-XAS part of the sample refraction index) it was demonstrated to be possible to extract EXAFS oscillations [52] similarly to what is done with the diffraction anomalous fine structure (DAFS) technique.

Experimental Examples

Surface Adsorbates
One of the major investigation fields where XAS in total reflection mode has been applied is the study of crystalline oxide surfaces of interest in catalysis like TiO 2 and Al 2 O 3 . In particular, the adsorption site of different metals on these surfaces has been studied. In this class of experiments total reflection XAS reveals to be unavoidable due to the extremely low metal coverage (of the order of 10 À2 Mono-Layers or 10 13 at/cm 2 ) so needing to limit at maximum the penetration of the probe beam into the substrate and minimize in this way the deleterious effects of coherent diffraction. The availability of instruments with full 6 axes goniometers in ultrahigh vacuum for sample orientation has permitted the development of PTRF-XAS [53]. The procedure consists in collecting XAS data on surfaces in total reflection condition and orienting the surface in several different positions to place the polarization vector along a set of relevant crystallographic directions and enhance in this way selected atomic bonds (Fig. 15.2) With this technique it has been demonstrated the possibility of defining full three-dimensional (3D) models of adsorption sites of metals on surfaces. Indeed, data are collected in three different orientations and then for any proposed structural model the relative polarized XAS spectra are calculated and compared with experimental data. This comparison permits the selection of the structural model best reproducing at the same time all three spectra so recovering a 3D information that is usually lost in the (spherical averaged) XAS spectra (see Fig. 15.3). Examples of use of this technique are given in a series of papers about the location of Mo ions on oxide surfaces [54][55][56][57][58]. Various atomic arrangements were found that were put in relationship with the acidity of the host surface [58]. When Mo was deposited on TiO 2 (rutile) (110) it formed Mo-Mo dimers oriented along the [110] direction whereas on Al 2 O 3 the metal sits in the center of a square base pyramid of oxygen atoms. Copper on TiO 2 (110) showed a marked tendency to aggregate in trimers or hexamers well oriented respect to the surface and depending on the calcination temperature after deposition [59]. The pretreatment of the surface with organic compounds [60,61] permitted to obtain dispersed metal ions in the +1 valence state. Also in the case of Ni it revealed to be extremely difficult to obtain dispersed ions on the rutile (110) surface. Koike et al. [62] reports on the determination of the Ni site for an unprecedented low coverage of 10 13 Ni/cm 2 that fully demonstrates the effectiveness of total reflection technique in treating highly diluted systems. Ni forms chemical bonds with the bridging oxygen atoms in the surface and occupies the site that would be taken by Ti if a further layer were grown on the clean surface. A similar behavior of dispersion only at very low coverage and "cation site occupation" is reported for Ni on Al 2 O 3 [63]. The metal-substrate interaction drives also the formation of metal island on the surface [64] for coverage levels of about 10 14 Ni/cm 2 whereas for denser deposition values Ni forms threedimensional metallic clusters.
Ni on different Al 2 O 3 surfaces has also been studied upon aqueous phase deposition [65]. It was found that Ni deposits in the form α-Ni(OH) From Ref. [53] bridge between two available O atoms on the surface and it can cycle between 2+ and 6+ valence states following exposure to O 2 or CO. [66] This particular data collection mode has found applications not only in catalysis but also in environmental science. Indeed, the possibility of studying the interaction of single mineral surfaces with polluting species has revealed to provide a more Carrying out this procedure allows the determination of the structure formed on the surface using a three-dimensional information. Figure from Ref. [64] complete description of the binding site then the analysis of powdered samples. The interaction of arsenate with hematite (0001) and (10-12) faces was studied with polarized grazing incidence XAS [67]. The study evidenced that the rearrangement of the surfaces under the effect of moisture leads to the availability of edges of FeO 6 octahedra where arsenate species bond forming a bidentate complex. On the other hand arsenate in the case of alumina ( 0001) and (11)(12)(13)(14)(15)(16)(17)(18)(19)(20) faces [68] and rutile (110) and (001) faces [69] was reported forms both monodentate and bidentate complexes.

Liquid Surfaces
A further application of polarized total reflection XAS is the analysis of liquid surfaces. In this case, being not possible to change the sample orientation respect to the beam polarization, it was this vector to be moved via a quarter wave plate. It is worth noticing that coupling measurements at low incidence angle (about 1 mrad) on a liquid surface while varying the beam polarization via a quarter wave plate represents a considerable experimental challenge. Studies have been conducted on Zn and Cu porphyrins on air/water and heptane/water interfaces. A marked dichroic behavior was observed for the 1s-4p z resonance peak appearing in the pre-edge region of both metals and that was used to determine the angle of the molecule plane respect to the interface. In the case of Zn [70,71] Zn-TPP molecule orients parallel to the surface (and a similar behavior is reported for Zn-TPPC at the heptane-water interface) [72] whereas Zn-PP molecules appear to be tilted by an angle comprised between 57 and 43 depending on its surface concentration. For Cu porphirins CuPP and CuChl the orientation angle was found to be constant with concentration at respective values of 29 and 34 [73]. The different behavior of the orientation of these molecules was put in relation with the capability of hydration behavior of the metal and the intermolecular lateral interactions. Other studies on the hydration of Br À ions in ionic liquids [74,75] permitted to distinguish two sites for Br one "free" surrounded by water molecules and the other "bound" partially linked to its counter-ion. For what concerns LB films it has been shown that a considerable experimental simplification can be obtained by depositing the layers on glassy substrates and then use them in a conventional sample manipulator, so avoiding the orientation constraints posed by the liquid surface. The interaction of Zn with phospholipids (DMPA and DMPC) has been studied in Ref. [76] finding the metal coordinated with oxygen about 0.2 nm, with no particular evidence of further coordination shells whereas in the cases of Cd and Pb [77] the metals have respectively an uni-dentate and bi-dentate coordination with the stearate molecules (DSPA) of the LB film.

Surface Reactions
One of the peculiar aspects of ReflEXAFS is that it can provide a probe for the topmost few nm of a surface thanks to the limited extinction length of the probe beam. This has been exploited in a variety of experiments studying the reaction of the surface of a bulk sample with an external environment. Frahm and his coworkers report about a rutile TiO 2 surface intercalated with Li [78]. This is a model system for Li-ion batteries and the aim of the study was to investigate the valence state of Ti only in the surface layer where Li is inserted during the intercalation process. A specially conceived cell permitted the collection of ReflEXAFS data at different moments of the voltammetric cycle. The result is that on the surface there is a shift at lower energies of the Ti-K absorption edge meaning a reduction of the metal. The Ti valence was estimated to change from +4 to +3.6 upon Li loading. The analysis of the EXAFS region permitted moreover to identify the intercalated phase as the anatase-like Li 0.6 TiO 2 . The surface reduction of Ti has been successively evidenced also for Li intercalation of the Anatase form of TiO 2 and for the same process was reported on Mo on Li:MoO 3 electrodes [79,80]. Another topic in electrochemistry studied by ReflEXAFS has been the anodic oxidation of Ag electrodes. An Ag-K edge ReflEXAFS study of was conducted with Ag electrodes immersed in 1 M NaOH aqueous solution with data collected again at different points of the voltammogram cycle [81]. It was demonstrated that the Ag oxidation of the outermost layer starts at potential values lower than the Nernst potential. The same authors in a successive paper [82] showed that for potential values less than +0.75 V the phase formed at the surface is Ag 2 O whereas above that value oxygen-deficient structures are formed with Ag in a double valence Ag + and Ag 3+ . Ag was also studied during dissolution in a weakly acid solution [83]. The surface layer resulted to be an Ag + oxide with a geometry different from that of crystalline Ag 2 O, most probably an amorphous form. Surface oxidation of metal layer has also been studied by the Yoneda-XAS technique. [84] This last technique has been demonstrated to be particularly sensitive to all phases exhibiting lateral inhomogeneities as it is the case for highly disordered oxide layers (Fig. 15.4). Air exposed Cu thin films were analyzed with a specially developed quantitative data analysis procedure. The oxide develops in two layers: an outer CuO fraction and an inner Cu 2 O fraction with a thickness increasing with the exposure time. ReflEXAFS ha been applied to the study of oxidation upon annealing on Nb layers buried under Al [85]. It was shown that the buried Nb surface is stable up to 200 C and only at 600 C the oxide fraction is increased. A further study on surface oxidation was carried out on stainless steel samples where it was evidenced that annealing the specimens in inert gas (Ar, N 2 ) adding silane together with H 2 dropped considerably the amount of residual oxide at the surface [86].
Together with gas-solid and liquid-solid reactions also solid-solid reactions have been the object of ReflEXAFS studies, in particular the reaction between Al  [28,88]. A depth-resolved study was carried out by collecting data below and above the critical angle as shown in Fig. 15.5. By using the CARD code and considering a multilayer model for the sample it was evidenced an unreacted oxide phase remaining on the surface and a reacted (spinel) phase as well as an intermediate one (i.e., not simply obtainable as linear combination oxide-spinel) in depth [25,27]. The balance of these phases is different for the two faces with the (0001) face markedly less reactive than the other.

Thin Films
As already pointed out in the case of adsorbates, ReflEXAFS reveals its strength in the study of deposited thin films. In this case it helps in minimizing the spurious signal from the substrate (incoherent scattering, Bragg peaks from crystalline matrices) enhancing the contribution of the layer to the total signal. An example in electrochemistry reports on Cu and Cd deposited from aqueous solution on Pt(533) surfaces studied by ReflEXAFS in situ using a specially developed deposition cell [89]. For potential values above the Nernst potential Cu forms linear aggregates at the surface terraces steps and then, for lower potentials, 2-dimensional clusters are formed that eventually merge in a complete monolayer with a 1 Â 1 structure. Cd has a similar behavior with the difference that the final mono-layer is not in register with the surface. Also thin films deposited in situ by radio-frequency sputtering have been extensively studied by XAS. In the case of Bi thin (6 nm) films quench-deposited at 20 K on float-glass substrates it was possible to establish a link between the irreversible increase of the resistivity that appears at about 45 K and the structure [90]. In particular it was evidenced that the film is initially amorphous and that crystallization takes place upon annealing and this structure is stable upon successive cooling. The deposition of thicker (18 nm) films leads directly to a crystalline rhombohedral phase and these films do not exhibit the irreversible resistivity soaring observed for the thinner layers [91]. In the case of Ag and Au [17] and SnN [92] thin films deposited by sputtering the fcc structures typical of the bulk form are found whereas for Ta oxide films [17,93], the structure of the film is markedly disordered. RefleXAFS has also permitted the determination of the structure of thin films for sensors applications as in the case of Pd-diethylbiphenyl [94], Pt-diethylbiphenyl [95], and other organo-metallic Pd (II) thiol complexes [96].
A particular case of deposited thin films can be considered also the deposits of atmospheric aerosols or dusts in environmental science studies. The fact of reducing the spurious signal from the substrate by depositing the sample on a clean surface permits the collection of better quality data in cases where the amount of  [28] sample is particularly reduced, as reported in the following studies about speciation of Fe in atmospheric dust. Urban aerosols only after 1 h of collection were analyzed, minimizing in this way the time during which possible Fe 2+ phases could undergo reduction [97]. Fe 3+ species were found to dominate the signal showing that the reduction takes place in a very short time. Instead, to enhance the signal from atmospheric aerosols extracted from Antarctica deep ice cores the total reflection technique was used and Fe was also found in a predominantly Fe 3+ state [98].

Materials for Electronics and Optics
Materials for electronics and optics are frequently prepared as surface or subsurface (some hundreds of Å below the surface) systems. Electronic devices are realized on Silicons by doping with various techniques (ion implantation, vapor phase) whereas surface waveguides are realized on glass in the case of devices for optics. Applying ReflEXAFS to these systems permits to concentrate the beam to the layer containing the absorbing atoms and limiting the propagation of the probe beam in the substrate.
Indium doping of Silicon represents a particularly challenging topic as In has a very low solubility in this matrix. The ReflEXAFS at the In-K edge revealed that In implanted at 183 keV and 5 Â 10 13 at/cm 2 (i.e., at the solubility limit) is substitutional with a structure in agreement with the structural simulations, whereas the addition of C leads to the formation of In/C complexes in the matrix [99]. Raising the implantation dose at 5 Â 10 14 at/cm 2 leads to the formation of In clusters [100]. Adding Carbon lead to the formation of In/C complexes also at high concentration opening the route to a possible exploitation of this element as p-dopant of Si [101]. Another considerable dopant (n type) for Si is As and in recent year it has attracted the attention of the community for the realization of ultrashallow junctions. In this case As is introduced in Si by implantation at very low energy (1-3 keV) and high fluence (10 15 at/cm 2 ) to realize highly doped layers (peak conc. 10 21 at/cm 3 ). By using depth resolved analysis realized by collecting the data above and below the critical angle it was evidences as Arsenic partially migrates in the surface oxide of the Si substrates forming inactive oxides and As clusters [34], whereas deep in the matrix it is substitutional and linked to vacancies. As clusters are also reported in some cases also inside the Si matrix [102] and suitable thermal processes are needed to maximize the total electrically active As [103]. Always in the field of microelectronics ReflEXAFS has been used for the study of thin layers of lanthanide oxides (Yb 2 O 3 , Lu 2 O 3 , Y 2 O 3 ) on Si as hi dielectric constant substitutes for native SiO 2 . In the former two cases the structure of the epitaxial layer is close to the bulk oxide [104], whereas the Y 2 O 3 case revealed a mixed Y/Si phase for the first few layers before the formation of the bulk phase [105]. In the field of materials for optics ReflEXAFS permitted the analysis of surface layers like Na-Tl ion-exchanged glasses [106] and Erbium-doped Silica-Titania-Hafnia thin films deposited by sol gel [107].

Conclusion and Perspectives
ReflEXAFS has revealed to be a powerful technique in a variety of research fields from surface chemistry to materials science. The perspectives of this experimental technique will depend critically on the evolution of the experimental apparatuses (X-ray sources and detectors) and on the improvements in data analysis.
On the first topic the advent of new rings with low horizontal emittance (see namely the design of the new ring for the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility) [108] will provide beams with a low horizontal size that will improve the quality of data collected with the samples surface perpendicular to the orbit plane. It is worth to stress here that the source brightness is a key point in the development of a ReflEXAFS instrument as the X-ray optics must provide a beam with at the same time low dimension and low divergence 1 . Also for XAS experiments on X-ray free electron lasers (X-FEL) the total reflection geometry could be exploited to minimize the local dose on flat samples. Care should be used in the design of timeresolved experiments: given that a typical FEL pulse is of the order of 100 fs this corresponds to a length of 3 mm and the beam footprint on the sample should not exceed this value, as instead it is frequently the case at synchrotron sources. A further possible field of evolution could be the use of X-ray emission spectroscopy (XES) in total reflection conditions. Here, a serious problem is posed by the geometry of the emitting portion of the sample that has the form of a long rectangle whereas a point emitter is preferred for the currently used spectrometers. Apart using a wavelength dispersive analyzer based on a cylindrical optics another interesting possible solution could be represented by solid state detectors with high energy resolution, namely superconducting transition edge sensors (TES) of superconducting tunnel junction (STJ) devices. If their use was already suggested several years ago [109], recently arrays of TES have been presented that could represent an interesting solution for XES in total reflection conditions [110].
For what concerns data analysis it has been shown that at present there are codes for a rigorous analysis of data both in fluorescence and reflectivity modes so data analysis is no longer to be considered as a critical issue. A major improvement could come from an increased quality of XAS signal simulation based on structural modeling as described in the examples above. The wide availability of codes for structural simulation based on density functional theory will help in the interpretation of the experimental data by comparison with fully relaxed bulk or surface structures. But an even more powerful could become the simulation of the XAS spectrum using molecular dynamics [111,112] about supported Pt nanoclusters or Zn, Fe impurities in Lead antimonate [113]. In this way the different candidate structures could be simulated with a realistic evaluation of the thermal/configurational disorder and compared in a more incisive way to the experimental results. High-Energy Resolution XAS Frank de Groot

Introduction
High-energy resolution X-ray absorption refers to the measurement of XANES spectra with the use of a detector signal that is measured coherently with the XANES measurement. The detector signal can be fluorescence, which is known under the name High-Energy Resolution Fluorescence Detected (HERFD) XANES. Similarly one can define High-Energy Resolution Auger Detection (HERAD) XANES.
The first HERFD experiments have been performed by Hamalainen and coworkers [1]. They recorded the dysprosium L 3 edge by detecting the 2p3d fluorescence with an energy resolution better than the core hole lifetime broadening. They indeed observed a much more structured spectral shape with respect to the conventional XANES spectrum. A similar experiment was performed on the Mn K pre-edge [2]. The first spectra using nonradiative decay channels have been published by the groups of Sham [3] and Drube [4,5].

Principle of High-Resolution XANES
In a HERFD experiment, a XANES spectrum is measured with a resolution that appears sharper than the lifetime broadening of the core hole. HERFD spectra are popular for the K edges of 3d transition metals and also for the L 2,3 edges of rare F. de Groot (*) Inorganic Chemistry and Catalysis, Utrecht University, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands e-mail: f.m.f.degroot@uu.nl earths and actinides. The quadrupole pre-edge structures in these edges appear much sharper in the HERFD spectra, see for example the iron pre-edge of Fe 2 SiO 4 in Fig. 16.1 [6]. The sharper features allow for a much more detailed analysis.
The main principle of HERFD XANES can best be described assuming a single 1s resonance state at the edge that is linked to a single 1s2p X-ray emission decay final state [7]. By tuning the incident photon energy close to the 1s absorption state, the X-ray absorption and X-ray emission processes occur coherently and the overall 1s2p process is described by the Kramers-Heisenberg formula:
This formula forms the basis of all resonant X-ray processes. The scattering cross section F is given as a function of the excitation energy (Ω) and the emission energy (ω). The ground state (g) is excited to an intermediate state (i), characterized by a 1s core hole via the dipole operator (T 1 ). The second dipole operator (T 2 ) describes the X-ray emission decay to the final state ( j) with a 2p core hole. The denominator contains the binding energy of the core hole state and its lifetime broadening. A resonance occurs if the excitation energy is equal to the 1s edge.
The general spectral landscape can be viewed as a two-dimensional space with axis Ω and ω. Figure 16.2 shows a contour-plot of the resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS) plane indicating a single core hole resonance coupled to a single final state [8]. The gray area is the peak maximum, which is set at 100. The first contour-line is set at 64 and each following line represents respectively 32, 16, 8, etc., as indicated in the figure. The horizontal axis shows the X-ray excitation energy. The X-ray absorption spectrum consists of a single resonance with an  [6] energy of approximately 11,560 eV. The vertical axis shows the final state energies with a maximum of the X-ray emission decay at 2123 eV.
Instead of normal X-ray absorption, one can measure the X-ray absorption spectrum at a fixed emission energy. This relates to the diagonal line in Fig. 16.2. The effective lifetime related broadening can be derived from the figure, and is given by
If the intermediate state lifetime broadening is much large than the final state lifetime broadening the total HERFD lifetime is approximately equal to the final state lifetime broadening. The Lorentzian broadening thus decreases in comparing normal X-ray absorption and selective X-ray absorption. In case of a single resonance this is a real effect that can be exploited in HERFD experiments.
In the case of a series of resonances with, in particular a series of different final state energies, the situation becomes more complex. Figure 16.3 shows the experimental data of 2p4f quadrupole pre-edge of LaF 3 at 460 eV [9]. The vertical X-ray emission axis shows the 2p5d decay channel centered at 0 eV. Detecting the HERFD XANES with such RIXS plane yields a number of pre-edge peaks related to the multiple X-ray emission channels, as indicated in the panel on the right. Note that this HERFD XANES spectrum is NOT the same as the XANES spectrum itself. The XANES spectrum consists of only a single peak at 460 eV; all the other Fig. 16.2 Two-dimensional contour plot of the RIXS plane of a single resonance and a single final state [8] structures are tails from different X-ray emission channels. This is an important warning that HERFD spectra should always be treated carefully in their approximation as pure XANES spectra.

Resonant Inelastic X-ray Scattering
A general way to present RIXS is by showing 2D plots that provide a comprehensive picture of the 1s X-ray absorption and the 1s2p X-ray emission processes. For quantitative purposes it is, however, more convenient to compare 1D spectral shapes. There are a number of ways one can create spectral shapes out of the 2D images [10]. In Fig. 16.4, three cross sections are shown, respectively:
• The constant incident energy (CIE) spectrum, a vertical cross section at fixed excitation energy (7112 eV in the figure). This relates to resonant X-ray emission spectra. • The constant transferred energy (CTE) spectra, a horizontal cross section at a constant transferred energy in Fig. 16.4a. In Fig. 16.4b, the CTE scan is a diagonal cross section. A constant transferred energy implies that for all excitation energies the same final states are probed. This could also be called constant final state (CFS) spectra. • The constant emission energy (CEE) spectra: a diagonal cross section at a constant emission energy in Fig. 16.4a. In Fig. 16.4b, the CEE scan is a horizontal cross section at fixed emission energy. This relates to the HERFD spectrum the so-called "lifetime."

Using the Chemical Options of the RIXS Plane
There are a number of ways in which one can use the RIXS planes to derive detailed information. We will briefly mention these options:

Valence Selective X-ray Absorption
If there is a valence shift in the X-ray emission energies of for example Fe 2+ and Fe 3+ , one can use the separate resonances to selective detect the XANES spectra of Fe 2+ and Fe 3+ in the same material. This has been demonstrated for the case of Prussian blue that contains a combination of Fe 2+ and Fe 3+ sites [11]. In case of an active catalyst one can track both signals and as such follow the time-evolution of the valence selective XANES spectra. In principle this also applies for the EXAFS spectra as has been shown in Ref. 11.

Spin Selective X-ray Absorption
Using the 1s3p X-ray emission channel, the main peak and the satellite are correlated with the spin state of the metal ion. As such one can distinguish different spin states in the X-ray absorption spectrum. It can be shown that spin selective X-ray absorption relates to the local spin moment and is essentially the same for a paramagnet and a ferromagnet [12].

Analysis of HERFD Spectra of the Pre-edge Peaks of Transition Metal K Edges
Over the last years, the use of HERFD XANES has greatly improved our knowledge of the 3d transition metal K pre-edge structures. In short the pre-edges can be understood as follows. For all systems there is the 1s3d quadrupole transition directly into the empty 3d states. This is essentially an atomic transition that has the same strength for any 3d valence hole. The pre-edge fine structure can be calculated with crystal field multiplet models. At higher energy there is the 1s4p dipole transition that defines the main K edge. The main K edge structure can be calculated with, for example, DFT based models such as band structure and multiple scattering [13].
Next there are a few options:
(a) If the system is divalent, has a metal ion with inversion symmetry, and has isolated transition metal ions, no additional features are present. (b) If the metal ion has no inversion symmetry, the metal 3d states mix with the metal 4p states. This implies that there are dipole transitions to the pre-edge and the pre-edge intensity will strongly increase in intensity. (c) If the metal ion has a trivalent or tetravalent nature, contains ligand bridged metal sites, and has inversion symmetry, non-local peaks will appear in the pre-edge region. The non-local peaks typically appear at 2.5 eV higher energy, and this energy difference is related to the additional core hole potential of the 3d excitonic states.
Figure 16.5 shows the RIXS planes of two low-spin Co(III) systems. The system that contains isolated Co ions only shows the quadrupole peak. The solid state oxide system that contain close Co-O-Co bonds show an additional peak at 2.5 eV higher excitation energy, related to a non-local excitation: The 1s core hole is dipole excited to a 4p state that hybridizes with the 3d-band of a cobalt ion that is close by. The energy of this non-local peak has higher excitation energy because the local 1s3d quadrupole peak is pulled down by the core hole potential [14]. Incident Energy (eV) Energy Transfer (eV) Incident Energy (eV) Intensity (arb. u.) Fig. 16.5 Two-dimensional contour plot of the 1s2p RIXS plane of two low-spin Co(III) systems, an isolated molecular system (left) and a solid state oxide system (right). The solid state spectrum has an additional peak related to the non-local transition [14] Chapter 17
Nonresonant Inelastic X-ray Scattering and X-ray Raman Scattering Timothy T. Fister

Introduction
In analogy to the connections between Raman scattering and absorption in the optical regime, X-ray Raman scattering (XRS) is an alternative to X-ray absorption spectroscopy, particularly for sub-keV excitations. XRS is the nonresonant inelastic X-ray scattering (NIXS, or NRIXS) from core or semi-core electrons and has a similar energy-dependence as X-ray absorption, albeit with a much smaller overall cross section. However, as a high-energy photon-in/photon-out approach, XRS has found widespread use for samples at extreme conditions, such as high pressure experiments in diamond anvil cells, as well as samples incompatible with vacuum conditions, like many liquids. Compared to absorption spectroscopy, XRS has key technical advantages beyond bulk sensitivity, including lack of self-absorption and the ability to access dipole-forbidden final states in certain cases. It also shares many of the same components as hard X-ray absorption/emission spectroscopy and has found a niche as a complementary technique available at multiple synchrotron facilities worldwide [1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9].

Physics of X-ray Raman scattering
NIXS has been used to measure a wide range of phenomena, ranging from acoustic excitations at meV losses to Compton scattering typically measured at keV energy scales. In general, NIXS measures the fraction of X-rays scattered into a solid angle, dΩ, within a range of energy loss, d E f À E i ð Þ¼d hω ð Þ. This double differential cross section is equal to a static contribution from Thomson scattering modulated by the dynamic structure factor S q; ω ð Þ, i.e.,
where q is the X-ray momentum transfer and ω is the energy loss term. Using Fermi's Golden Rule, the dynamic structure factor can be written in terms of the electron's matrix element, with a delta function enforcing energy conservation:
When q À1 is smaller than the size of the initial (or final) state, Eq. ( 17.2) can be approximated by the leading term in the expansion of e iqÁr . In this so-called dipole approximation, dynamic structure factor is proportional to the absorption coefficient, μ, with the direction of q playing the role of X-ray polarization in XAS.
Higher-order multipole terms in the matrix element give rise to dipole-forbidden transitions that are inaccessible to XAS. This unique feature is discussed in Sect. 17.3. The physical process for XRS is intuitively similar to XAS and is illustrated in Fig. 17.1a. Rather than being absorbed, a photon loses a fraction of its energy during scattering with a bound electron. When that energy transferred exceeds that electron's binding energy, it is excited to some final state, modulated by matrix element shown in Eqs. (17.2) and (17.3), leading to a similar step-edge as XAFS. That same photon could scatter from any of the other electrons with lower binding energies though, so the XRS signal typically coincides with a smoothly varying Compton background as seen in Fig. 17 Near-edge structure can be easily extracted by fitting this background or by calculating the Compton profile using the impulse approximation. Extended fine structure can even be extracted [10][11][12][13][14][15], in analogy to EXAFS, i.e.,
Both the fine structure and atomic background (S 0 ) can be calculated using a Greens function approach analogous to XAFS methods [16,17] or using DFT-based approaches. The contributions to the atomic background S 0 include valence and core electrons, requiring careful modeling and background subtraction. Methods for modeling and fitting the Compton background to extract the XRS signal has been described previously by Sternemann [18], Huotari [11], and Sahl [19].

Measuring XRS
Even when integrated over all q, the cross section for NIXS is vastly smaller than photoelectric processes for most materials at typical scattering conditions ~10 keV. When factoring in the small amount of solid angle that's typically measured and the Compton background from all other electrons in the sample and its surrounding environment, it's no surprise that XRS was not heavily studied until the advent of third generation synchrotron sources and is still primarily used for experiments where its bulk sensitivity or q-dependence is required. That said, recent advances in the source, optics, and detector technology have dramatically expanded the scope of XRS beyond first-row K-edges, opening up the technique to classes of materials ranging from gaseous samples [20,21] to actinides [22,23]. XRS, and NIXS in general, requires diffractive optics to resolve the energy of incident and scattered X-rays. As illustrated in Fig. 17.2, the incident energy is typically tuned by a monochromator and a cone of scattered X-rays are integrated using analyzers that are bent or diced to a spherical curvature that approximates the Rowland circle condition. The scattered X-rays are typically kept at a fixed energy defined by its Bragg angle and a momentum transfer set by its angle from incident  To increase the overall NIXS and XRS signal, setups incorporating arrays of analyzers at fixed [24] or variable [2] q have been developed in the last decade. The energy resolution and throughput of NIXS has also improved by incorporating area detectors with pixels small enough to resolve the energy spread of the scattered X-rays [25,26]. Similarly, area detectors can be used to resolve the spatial extent of the sample using the point-to-point focusing of the analyzer. This is particularly relevant for samples embedded in a diamond anvil cell or capillary, as shown in Fig. 17 While current multielement setups have certainly increased the solid angle measured by XRS, there is still plenty of room for growth. Analyzers capable of reaching lower radius of curvature would greatly increase solid angle. XRS could also benefit from working at higher energies, where a greater sample volume can be accessed and the shifting weight of the Compton background could make higher energy loss spectra become more feasible. Recent developments using bent Laue analyzers at recently demonstrated the feasibility of XRS at 20 keV [15].  The 1m Rowland circle defining diffraction from the silicon analyzer crystal is also shown for reference

XRS in Extreme Environments
XAS below 1 keV has been largely limited to vacuum conditions and often only probes the surface or near-surface phenomena [27,28]. This surface-sensitivity has been invaluable for studying catalysts and thin films [29], but often prevents the study of materials in situ or samples with high vapor pressure (like many liquids) [14,[30][31][32]. With few exceptions [33], XRS is a bulk sensitive technique, which can be advantageous for studying volatile samples [34,35], like battery components [36], or materials at extreme conditions [37][38][39]. Despite its low cross section, XRS Fig. 17.3 Many samples cannot be approximated as point-sources. The point-topoint focusing from a spherically bent crystal actually provides an image of the sample and its environment which can be resolved on an area detector. In the work by Sahle et al. [19], NIXS from a liquid sample in a glass capillary was imaged in this manner so that the weaker signal from the liquid could be extracted from the strong quartz background is insensitive to sampling depth, which often complicates the analysis of soft X-ray measurements that rely on electron yield (variable photoelectron escape depth) or fluorescence (self-absorption).
One area previously inaccessible to soft X-rays has been the study of materials at high pressure [38][39][40][41][42][43][44][45][46]. These experiments involve diamond anvil cell, where the sample is embedded in a pressure medium that's sealed by a beryllium gasket. A classic early example of high pressure XRS was the transition of graphitic carbon to diamond at ultrahigh pressures [39]. As seen in Fig. 17.4, the signature of sp 2 hybridized graphite, a strong π* resonance corresponding to unoccupied out-ofplane p orbitals, is gradually reduced and converted to diamond's sp 3 spectrum. This study incorporates not only the bulk sensitivity of XRS, but its ability to measure natural dichroism via the direction of the X-ray momentum transfer (see Eq. 17.3).
The ability to probe low-Z K-edges with bulk sensitivity was recognized as a unique opportunity for catalysts early in the development of XRS [7,47,48]. As sources and detectors matured, the technique has started to be used for   3 hybridization can be easily seen by the reduction of the pre-edge π* resonance in the C K-edge [39] accessing changes in the spectroscopy of catalysts at relevant working conditions, i.e., at atmospheric pressure in a variable gas environment [49,50]. Borohydrides have long been seen as key material for hydrogen storage and fuel cell applications. These attributes can be seen directly in Fig. 17

XRS Beyond the Dipole Limit
Using high energy X-ray scattering to probe low energy excitations provides an additional benefit over soft X-ray absorption: the ability to measure dipoleforbidden final states. XAFS at, say, a K-edge is limited to transitions to p-type final states due to the dipole selection rule (i.e., Δl ¼ AE1). Final states with s-, or dtype symmetry are typically identified by hybridization or via weakly allowed pre-edge resonances. In XRS, these states emerge at higher q, corresponding to selection rules associated with higher order terms in the expansion of the matrix element in Eq. (17.3). One of the first studies exploiting this q-dependence was the work of Hamalainen's group [51], which used the increase of a pre-edge peak in LiF's F K-edge to identify its core-exciton as s-type. This analysis was followed up by Seidler's group who studied core excitons in B 4 C [52], NaF, and NaCl [53]. In particular the symmetry of the exciton in B 4 C helped identify its origin at the one crystallographic site exhibiting inversion symmetry (Fig. 17.6).
Furthermore, the different symmetry states can be physically separated by measuring the q-dependence of the XRS spectrum. This method was formalized by Soininen and coworkers, who recast the dynamic structure factor in an angular momentum (l ) basis [54]. For a powder, this simplified to
where terms in the angular momentum projected density of states are weighted by factors that depend only on the initial state's atomic properties. Using Eq. (17.4), XRS can be used to quantitatively extract the hybridization of the density of states itself [52].
As an example, this method was used on C 2 B 10 H 12 , an icosahedral molecule that is the most well-known member of the carboranes [55]. As seen in Fig. 17.7, the dipole forbidden s ! s transitions found at high q helped pinpoint radially hybridized s-p states that are related to the molecules 3D aromaticity. Similar analysis has been performed to understand bonding in superionic Li 3 N [56], battery interphases [34], and the superconductor MgB 2 [57].
While XRS has been largely used for first row K-edges, it has been increasingly used for excitations from semicore levels from higher Z edges. This was pioneered for L-edges in semiconductors [58][59][60][61] and metals [10,62,63], and more recently has been extended to lanthanides [64][65][66] and actinides [22,67]. This was initially surprising since the micron-scale penetration lengths in high-Z materials severely limits the scattering volume for inelastic processes. For open band f and d-electron materials, the ability to bypass dipole excitations opens up remarkably strong transitions at high q to unoccupied atomic orbitals that would otherwise be inaccessible by absorption. As seen in Fig. 17.8, these orbitals provide a clear ability to probe f-electron occupation which is crucial for understanding the exotic chemical properties of actinides. The strong q-dependence from the uranium O 4,5 edge,    (Right) This decrease in the integrated intensity of the feature with q confirms its p-type symmetry. This analysis confirmed that the exciton is associated with the one boron site that has inversion symmetry, denoted by the large black atom in the upper right model [52] where the previously observed giant dipole resonance gives way to sharp multiplet lines arising from octupole (Δl ¼ 3) and triakontadipole (Δl ¼ 5) transitions from the combined angular momentum transfer of the hybridized 5d-5f states (combined  angular momentum up to l ¼ 7). In the case of UO 2 (pure 5f 2 ) and mixed-valent U 3 O 7 , the f-character can be identified from these high order multipole transitions using a single-atom calculation. This study also incorporates the bulk sensitivity of XRS, which is necessary to penetrate through multiple layers of shielding typically required for radioactive samples. These studies represent just a small fraction of the growing body of work using X-ray Raman scattering. They show that XRS provides alternative capabilities to XAS or electron energy loss spectroscopy for materials requiring non-vacuum conditions or reaching final states inaccessible to traditional spectroscopies. Continuing advances in optics and detector technology are helping to stimulate this technique to more challenging edges from materials across the periodic table.

Quantifying Structure with MD-XAFS
A quantitative method of interpreting structure in XAFS spectra is available through a first-principles comparison to molecular dynamics simulations (MD-XAFS). The synergy of these two methods can provide important insights into a variety of different chemical systems far beyond what is available from each individual technique. Molecular dynamics (MD) is used to generate a relevant equilibrium ensemble based upon an accurate description of molecular interactions. These interactions are predicted using either empirical potentials or electronic structure in terms of efficient density functional theory, or in principle, from more comprehensive electronic structure techniques that systematically account for electron correlation and weak interaction. The underlying basis for both XAFS and MD is the molecular structure. In XAFS, the positions of atoms about the central absorbing atom of interest are probed by photoelectron backscattering of the ejected core electron. A similar representation of the local atom structure is one of the central entities from a molecular dynamics simulation that is given by the radial pair distribution function, g ab (r). The g ab (r)'s represent the probability of finding an atom "b" at some distance from a central atom "a" of interest. Historically, peaks in the g ab (r) from the MD are compared in a qualitative way to features in the radial structure plot, e χ R ð Þ j j, derived from the XAFS spectrum. However, the MD-XAFS method is a fully quantitative, first-principles method to directly compute the full XAFS spectra using the millions of atomic positions that are part of a typical molecular dynamics trajectory and that represent a thermodynamic ensemble. The point to stress is that this XAFS spectrum, which is generated using first-principles methods (or MD-XAF spectrum), includes contributions from all of the possible photoelectron single-and multiple-scattering events that are a consequence of the arrangement of atoms about the absorber. The resulting MD-XAFS spectrum captures the correlations in positions, angular structure, and geometry. There are several ways in which the MD-XAFS method can be used including (1) gaining insights into the chemistry of the experimental system, (2) evaluating and assigning specific structural features in the experimental XAFS spectrum to atom types or their positions, and (3) validating or benchmarking the simulated MD structure against the measurement. The combined methods of XAFS and MD provide a powerful probe of the structure. Ultimately, these methods improve the understanding of the relationship between structure, fluctuations, energy, forces, and the motions that control the chemical properties of the system.
Using the classical method of XAFS data analysis, which is now some 40 years old, the scientist makes logical choices about atom positions for the first-and second-shell atom types based upon an understanding of the expected chemistry of the system. Next, a theoretical standard (e.g., FEFF [1][2][3]) is generated to model the scattering contribution from each of the expected paths. Least squares fitting is then used to refine atom-atom distances and determine the disorder parameters (Debye-Waller factors). This classical method becomes increasingly intractable as distances increase beyond the first shell since the number of different possible scattering paths increases geometrically with the distance from the absorber. The problem is also compounded by the contribution of the photoelectron multiplescattering paths that add another layer of complexity to the analysis. For instance, certain angular orientations of sets of atoms (especially collinear arrangements) lead to dramatically enhanced photoelectron scattering through a focusing effect. Such an analysis quickly becomes complex, requiring an expert for analysis. MD-XAFS greatly simplifies this process because the entire set of single and multiple-scattering paths out to approximately four and five shells from the absorber, is treated exactly, thus fully accounting for the atom disorder (static and dynamic) as well as the asymmetry or anharmonicity of the distribution for all atoms in the simulation.
In many condensed phase systems, the structures of interest often do not exist in a single state but exist in equilibrium with two or more species. This is especially true in reacting systems where the catalyst can exist as a resting state in equilibrium with various excited states along the reaction pathway. Using classical XAFS methods, the ability to deconvolute these structural contributions in XAFS becomes difficult for equilibria involving more than a couple of different species. On the other hand, when the MD simulation accurately represents the overall equilibrium speciation, then generation of an MD-XAFS spectrum that exactly replicates the experimental spectrum helps verify the fidelity of the simulation and helps in the understanding of the overall chemical speciation.
Another factor that has led to the dramatic rise and adoption of the MD-XAFS method is the high structural fidelity of density functional theory electronic structure (DFT)-based molecular dynamics for probing diverse chemical systems at modest size length scales. Historically, the interaction between atoms and molecules was represented using empirical functions such as the Lennard-Jones function modified in various ways to treat atomic charge and longer range electrostatic interactions. The structural parameters in the Lennard-Jones representation are optimized through a process of fitting to various micro-and macroscopic experimental properties. In this way, it is possible to achieve a reasonable representation of pairs of molecular interactions. The DFT-based MD methods advance this process in two major ways. First, the interatomic interactions are a response to the electronic structures of the individual atoms in the simulation. Equally important, for systems that contain a multitude of different chemical components, DFT-MD methods properly treat all the possible pair interactions without a need of developing a new empirical potential for each atom-atom type. This fact enables studies of systems with great chemically complexity or systems that are undergoing chemical reactions. Even within the last 5 years the fidelity of DFT-MD methods has experienced a dramatic improvement that in many instances achieves a nearly quantitative representation of the structural features in the experimental system.
The XAFS region is commonly split into x-ray absorption near edge spectroscopy (XANES) and the extended x-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) regions. For both of these spectral regions the overall process of converting an MD ensemble into an XAFS spectrum using that appropriate x-ray absorption theory is nearly identical. In this chapter, the focus is solely upon generation of EXAFS spectra from the MD ensemble; however, there are many equally interesting opportunities for XANES analysis that will not be covered in this discussion.

Recent Literature Highlights
Early studies using molecular dynamics directly coupled to an electron multiplescattering calculation (MD-XAFS) to better understand the XAFS signal, involved the analysis of the complex solvation of ionic species such as Sr 2þ , Br À , Ni 2þ , Cu þ , and Cu 2þ [4][5][6][7][8]. Around the same time, colocated research groups influenced each other and it was found that such an analysis could unravel the complexities associated with the aqueous ion/surface interface [9]. Due to simulation efficiency at the time, these studies were limited by an empirical description of molecular interaction. Soon to follow, MD-XAFS techniques were used routinely to benchmark empirical potentials and the solvation of a variety of ions including Cr 3þ , Ca 2þ , Sr 2þ , K þ , Cl À [10][11][12][13].
These approaches found limited success. It was a challenge for the empirical potentials to both recover the measured ion-water bond distance as well as the Debye-Waller factor. With the development of density functional theory (DFT) electronic structure driven sampling, more complex molecules such as UO 2 2þ and metals Ag þ , Zn 2þ , Ce 3þ , U, Ca 2þ have become routine [14][15][16][17][18][19].
Other studies of ion solvation using MD-XAFS include testing of nonempirical cation-water potentials for aqueous Cr 3þ and of Ir 3þ [20,21]. There are studies of the use of empirical potentials for modeling Br À hydration and the formation of Ag chloride complexes in water at temperature up to 450 C [22,23]. In related areas the solvation of K þ in solid polymer electrolytes was modeled using empirical force fields that are derived from ab initio methods [24,25]. In solid phase studies, MD-XAFS has been used to evaluate empirical force-field models in a wide band-gap semiconductor, ZnO [26], and in probing vacancies in NiO nanoparticles [27,28]. It is also important to note, in the context of aqueous ion, the recent extensive studies of halides [29] and lanthanoids [30] ions using an analysis method in which the XAFS spectra are generated from MD g(r)'s.
For MD-XAFS, the balance between the bond distance and the Debye-Waller factor appeared to be resolved with the use of DFT sampling. This was demonstrated for a series of transition-metal ions [31]. Other examples of unprecedented detail regarding the balance between forces resolved by DFT electronic structure, include the improved understanding of the iodide anion and its propensity to be at a vapor/liquid interface [32]. Improved descriptions of short-range interaction supplied by DFT have proven to be essential to describe the solvation of complex ions such as iodate (IO 3 À ) [33], as well as the balance associated with ion pairing in hydrochloric acid (Cl [34]. Such consistency between molecular interaction and measure XAFS signal has impacted the analysis of catalytic systems [35,36].
18.2 Theory: Calculating an XAFS Spectra from MD Simulation

The Process of Generating an MD-XAFS Spectrum
The method used to generate an XAFS spectrum from a molecular dynamics simulation is shown conceptually in Fig. 18.1. The first step is to generate a trajectory of the fully equilibrated chemical system representing the statistic ensemble of the system. Such a trajectory typically contains several thousand individual snapshots. These collective snapshots represent a configuration in a statistical mechanical ensemble corresponding to a certain density (or pressure) and temperature of the measured system. For each snapshot, all of the atom positions (x, y, z coordinates) about the absorber(s) of interest are used as input to the XAFS ab initio scattering code (e.g., FEFF) [3]. This process is repeated for each snapshot to create an ensemble average spectrum that contains the contributions from all of the structural information in the full trajectory. This process of generating an MD-XAFS spectrum is formally represented by Eq. 18.1,
wherein F(k), φ(k), and λ are the scattering amplitudes, the photoelectron phase shifts, and the photoelectron mean free paths, respectively, as calculated by FEFF9 [1]. S 2 0 is the core hole lifetime amplitude factor. Treatment of the disorder, (Debye-Waller factor), the third and fourth cumulants of the distribution are included implicitly in the simulation and thus are treated exactly in the generation of the MD-XAFS spectrum.
For each individual snapshot, approximately 10 3 relevant scattering paths (SS and MS) are included. The trajectories typically contain several thousand frames or snapshots and thus an ensemble average of greater than approximately 10 6 scattering events is accumulated in the resultant MD-XAFS spectrum. It is important to emphasize that the MD-XAFS method [4,9] represents all the relevant photoelectron scattering events (~10 6 ) including single and multiplescattering processes that uniquely define the static and dynamic structures about the absorber [15,16]. By implicitly including all relevant multiple-scattering signals we are able to go beyond the traditional route of comparing individual g (r)'s from MD trajectories to the single-scattering contributions of the XAFS spectra. The method also makes no assumptions about the shape (disorder) of the pair distribution functions from the simulation. This MD-XAFS approach was originally implemented using MD simulation based upon empirical interaction potentials [4,12]. More recently, DFT-based simulations have been used such as those for evaluating hydration of cations or anions in water [16,32,33]. In many cases, as we will illustrate later, the agreement between the calculated XAFS spectrum from DFT-base MD simulation and the experimental spectra is nearly quantitative. The comparison of the calculated and the measured χ(k) spectra requires one preprocessing step. The theoretical and experimental absorption edge energies or E 0 's must coincide. The required accuracy of less than AE1.0 eV for the predicted E 0 is presently not possible with current efficient electron multiple-scattering theories. For this reason, E 0 is a single adjustable parameter that is required to properly align the experimental and theoretical spectra. It is important to match the absorption edge energy, E 0 , between theory and experiment to properly compare their χ(k) plots. The main criterion is that the primary oscillations in χ(k) plots of the experiment and simulation must converge to the same values as k approaches zero. More importantly, the E 0 shift for the multiple-scattering and the longer range scattering paths must also be properly aligned. Without a proper E 0 alignment, the longer range structure beyond the first peak of the Fourier-transformed Im e χ R ð Þ ½ plots will be distorted. For example, one method to assure an overall E 0 match in the multiple-scattering region is to first window a certain region in the higher R-space and then inverse transform to generate a "q plot." The phase of the oscillations should converge as q approaches zero so that a further minor correction to the initial E 0 estimate is sometimes required. Typically, a single E 0 value is used for all single and multiple-scattering paths. The inclusion of automated selfconsistent potential calculations (SCF) within FEFF9 [1] provides the best possible initial estimate of edge energies for all single and multiple-scattering paths.
In the sections that follow several aspects of MD-XAFS that are useful in the interpretation of various structural feature are described. In this way, the MD-XAFS spectrum can be used as a diagnostic tool to interpret features in the experimental spectrum. There are multiple ways in which MD-XAFS can be applied. Four of these methods are presented later.

Incremental or Partial Structural Contributions to the Total MD-XAFS Spectrum
When the atomic structure in local regions about the absorber includes atoms that are at slightly different distances (static disorder), or the atoms contain significant amount of dynamic disorder, or when there is more than one type of atom, it is often difficult to assign a particular feature in the radial structure function, e χ R ð Þ j j, to a certain atom configuration. In XAFS analysis this problem is compounded by the fact that the photoelectron phase shift function (φ(k) in Eq. 18.1) causes broadening of the Fourier transform and displacement of the apparent atom positions even though the true spatial resolution is often equal to that obtained from the best XRD or ND spectra. The use of MD-XAFS offers that ability to dissect the contribution from various atom groups to the measured XAFS spectrum. Figure 18.2a shows an example of this process for the ordering of water molecules about the iodide ion whose structure is shown schematically in the insert [32]. The I-O pair distribution functions from DFT-MD are decomposed into their incremental Nth-neighbor contributions shown in Fig. 18.2a. These incremental contributions of water populations were constructed as follows. For each representative configuration the water molecules are sorted with respect to the iodide-oxygen distance to identify successive water molecule neighbors. In Fig. 18.2b, the cumulative Nth-neighbor populations show how the distribution of water molecules evolves as the number of water molecules increases up to the full I-O g(r). These cumulative subsets are used to calculate the cumulative MD-XAFS spectra in Fig. 18.2c, d. It is clear to see the complex way in which the XAFS spectrum evolves with each successive shell. This method helps to delineate which regions of the spectrum can be assigned to which hydration shells of the incremental plot in Fig. 18.2a [32].
Whereas the information in the g(r) plot of Fig. 18.2b is only relevant to the single-scattering paths about the absorber, the information in the cumulative XAFS plots in Fig. 18.2c, d contains all the possible single-and multiple-scattering paths that are within the selected set of atoms. In Fig. 18.2c, d, we show the convergence of the amplitude and imaginary part of the XAFS signal, respectively. The arrows indicate the progression with increasing inclusion of nearest neighbors. We find that the signal becomes converged by the inclusion of the seventh nearest neighbor. Beyond this the distribution of position becomes broad and the effective Debye Waller factor reduces its contribution to the XAFS signal. The consistency of the prediction of the XAFS signal [32] with the measured signal gives us confidence that the density functional theory description of the molecular interaction between iodide and water can be predictive in describing the local solvation structure of such species. ions that are schematically illustrated in Fig. 18.3a. This example illustrates how the scattering contributions from features in the longer range structure in the region from about 2 to 6 Å can be evaluated. This small, trivalent cation is hydrated by six waters in the first shell and they are ordered in a nearly pure octahedral symmetry [31]. This octahedral symmetry leads to a set of strong, collinear multiple-scattering paths (MS) whose position in the radial structure plot (k 2 -weighted e χ R ð Þ j j) overlies the region for the single-scattering (SS) from a well-ordered second hydration shell (see Fig. 18.3b). The question arises then about whether these two spatially coincident contributions can be independently resolved in the XAFS spectrum. MD-XAFS is used to isolate these features to compare their relative contributions, as illustrated in Fig. 18.3b. The result shows that the contributions from SS and MS structures each have a unique pattern that allows these two scattering feature to be readily resolved. In this system, many paths contribute to both the SS and MS signals making it difficult to assign parameters to all of the paths and manually fit the signal, resulting in an underdetermined system. The MD generation of the ensemble provides the additional constraints provided by molecular interaction and statistical thermodynamics, allowing a consistent characterization of the system, maximizing the impact of the experimental measurement. These results are similar to an earlier report of this system [20]. The same approach may be applied to features at even longer distances, especially for those materials that have lower degrees of static or dynamic disorder where scattering features up to as far as 8 Å from the absorber might be expected. Such features can have contributions from accumulation of 100's or even 1000's of different types of scattering paths. In this case, the relative contributions of these scattering paths can only be evaluated using a method that takes advantage of the information from the full molecular ensemble.
An example of this long-range structure is provided in Fig. 18.4 for aqueous Zn 2þ , which like Cr 3þ also has an octahedral first hydration shell. In Fig. 18.4, results from both a GGA functional (PBE96) and a hybrid functional (PBE0) DFT simulation are shown in comparison to the experimental results [16,31]. This example illustrates how features at such long distances are predicted by MD-XAFS. In Fig. 18.4a, specific regions of the R-space spectra are windowed and then they are backtransformed to the q-space plots shown in Fig. 18.4b, c. This procedure can be used to determine if the structure that arises in the simulated spectrum coincides Fig. 18.4 Specific regions of the R-space spectra are windowed and then they are backtransformed to q-space for 0.4 m Zn 2þ in water. Two different DFT protocols (PBE and PBE0) are compared to the experimental spectrum. Reprinted with permission from ref. [31]. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society with the amplitude envelope and the frequency of the oscillations in χ(k) of the experimental spectrum. In Fig. 18.4a, two different regions, between 3 < R < 4 Å and 4.5 < R < 5.6 Å, have been windowed and the resulting inverse transform to q-space is shown in Fig. 18.4b, c, respectively.
As might be expected, for the multiple-scattering region in the shorter range region from 3 to 4.1 Å, the inverse-transform q-space spectrum (Fig. 18.4b) is quantitatively reproduced by the simulations. However, the expectation for the region between 4.5 and 5.6 Å (in Fig. 18.4c) is different. The origin of these features is not completely known because there are 100's of contributing scattering paths that contribute to this region. In part, there are significant contributions from collinear O-Zn-O triple-scattering processes. Both of the DFT simulations accurately capture all of these higher order scattering processes. The ability of the simulation to calculate the long-range structure provides a stringent test of the fidelity of the simulation since even small amounts of structural error would alter the "fingerprint" in this long-range structure.

Multi-edge XAFS Evaluation of Multiple Scattering Using MD-XAFS
There are often limits in the ability of XAFS to discriminate small differences in structure or symmetry. The analysis of XAFS taken at two different edges (e.g., Kand L-edges) can be used in some cases to dramatically improve the structural resolution. For instance, multiple-scattering oscillations at the L 2 and L 3 -edges have distinctly different phase and amplitude functions than at the K-edge [15]. These phase and amplitude functions depend not only on the symmetry of the multiple-scattering paths but also on the nature of the final state electronic wave function probed by the dipole-allowed transition. Hence, the multiple-scattering portions of K-edge spectra acquired with L 2 -or L 3 -edge spectra provide independent measurements of the local symmetry not a redundant measurement as is commonly believed. Figure 18.5 illustrates this concept using theory calculations (FEFF) [3] for clusters of water molecules having two different idealized symmetries about an Ag þ ion. In one case, there are 5 waters in a bipyramidal arrangement and in the other case 4 waters are in a tetrahedral arrangement. For all of the singlescattering paths, there is a simple π-phase shift in the χ(k) oscillations for these sversus p-initial states. However for the multiple-scattering portion of the spectrum, the ligand symmetry also strongly defines the phase shift for s-and p-states. The resultant Im e χ R ð Þ ½ plots that are compared in Fig. 18.5a, b show that the symmetry uniquely controls the multiple-scattering features.
This multiedge analysis method is demonstrated by the use of MD-XAFS to resolve the hydration structure about the iodate anion in water [32]. Initial DFT molecular dynamics simulations predict a very unusual hydration structure about iodate. As shown in the schematic of Fig. 18.6, the region near the O's of the iodate is hydrated by waters that are oriented with their H's pointed toward the anion. In the region about the iodine atom, the waters are rotated approximately 180 such that the O's are interacting with the I atom. This leads to the remarkable conclusion that one region of iodate behaves like a cation while the other region behaves like an anion. Multiedge analysis offers the opportunity to clearly resolve this structure experimentally. In Fig. 18.6, the K-, L 1 -, and L 3 -edge experimental spectra are compared to those calculated from DFT-MD simulations. Across the entire R-range there is near-quantitative agreement for all three edges, thus confirming the structural features of the simulation.

Molecular Dynamics XAFS for Diverse Chemical Systems
Perhaps the most important role of MD-XAFS, when combined with experimental spectra, is to derive a deeper understanding of the chemistry and structure in condensed phase systems. In particular, density functional theory-based MD can accommodate the extreme chemical diversity of many systems by treating the dozens of different intermolecular interactions and their chemical reactions using first-principle methods. DFT represents a powerful representation of molecular interaction that contains an explicit representation of electron charge density and takes into account electronic structure, allowing for an effective treatment of bonding. It is a technique that contains a balance between efficiency and accuracy that enables effective sampling of configurations of systems of sufficient size to be predictive.
The sections below provide brief examples of several different types of chemical systems in which DFT-MD simulations quantitatively replicate the average structure in the experimental system. The examples include (1) the hydration structure about aqueous divalent and trivalent transition metal ions in water, (2) the structure of a Rh 4 catalyst cluster while it is active in a dehydrogenation reaction, (3) the structure about an Al atom in two different crystalline solids, and (4) the ion-pair structure of Cl À with hydronium ion (H 3 O þ ) in water.

Transition Metal Ions in Water
The hydration of transition metal ions is important in catalysis, biochemical reactions especially those involving enzymes and in broad areas of geochemistry. Figure 18.7 compares the structure for a series of cations [31] including Cr 3þ , Fe 3þ , Mn 2þ , Co 2þ , Ni 2þ , Zn 2þ , and Ca 2þ . These divalent and trivalent cations generally have 6 coordinating waters in the first shell in an octahedral symmetry. The cations that have smaller ion radii or high ionic charge (3þ) will also have a well-defined second hydration shell containing approximately 12 water molecules. The XAFS signal for all of these systems is dominated by single scattering from the waters in the first shell. Equally important with respect to the structural information are the photoelectron multiple-scattering paths originating from the first shell waters. The multiple-scattering paths lead to a unique XAFS signature or fingerprint that is different for each ion due to small differences in the distances and disorder. Finally, there are the single-scattering paths from the second hydration shell that also contribute significantly to the total photoelectron scattering.
Figure 18.7 compares the experimental Im e χ R ð Þ j j spectra with the predicted spectra from two different types of DFT-MD simulations [31]. One of the simulations (AIMD) uses a GGA functional (PBE96) wherein all molecules in the Fig. 18.7 MD-XAFS spectra from two different DFT-MD simulations for a series of transition metal cations. Reprinted with permission from ref. [31]. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society simulation are treated at the same DFT level. The other type of the simulation (QM/MM) uses a more computationally expensive hybrid functional that includes exchange (PBE0) to describe the first-shell water, whereas the higher water shells are treated using classical empirical potentials (MM). As shown in Fig. 18.7, both levels of theory provide near-quantitative agreement with the experimental spectra for most ions including the single-scattering peak at about 1.5-2 Å as well as the more challenging multiple-scattering features at 3-4.5 Å. This level of agreement is difficult to achieve with classical potentials without development of, and careful optimization of the ion-water interaction potentials. This example exemplifies the quality and ease of implementation of DFT-MD simulations. This example also shows the ease in which various simulation approaches can be benchmarked against a range of different chemical systems.
Only through comparison with a comprehensive series of ions having different interaction strengths is it possible to identify systematic errors that are part of the DFT theory. A large improvement in agreement of the theory was obtained by increasing the accuracy of the pseudopotential from the common default setting. By including the 3 s and 3p functions in the description of the pseudopotential, thereby better describing polarization, there is a large improvement in the predicted first shell bond distance by approximately 0.1 Å. The second factor affecting the DFT accuracy is the level of exchange in the theory. Inclusion of exchange (PBE0) further improved the metal-water distance by about 0.03 Å and also results in significant improvement in the predicted Debye Waller factor for the first shell [31].

Reacting System of Rh 4 Clusters During the Dehydrogenation of Amine Borane
Another example of MD-XAFS analysis involves tracking the structure of a transition-metal catalyst during (operando) a chemical reaction [35]. The reaction of interest involves the dehydrogenation of amine boranes (Fig. 18.8b) representing a possible starting point for hydrogen storage [35,37,38]. This dehydrogenation reaction is readily catalyzed by a homogeneous Rh species. As illustrated in the schematic of Fig. 18.8a, the catalyst involves a Rh 4 cluster that is capped on each Rh atom by two ligands of methyl ammonium borane that are binding through the B atom. Figure 18.8c shows three examples of different snapshots from the DFT trajectory for his reaction [35]. The Rh 4 cluster undergoes significant alteration during the cycle of the amine borane dehydrogenation reaction. Some of observed intermediate species are shown in the schematics of Fig. 18.8d that illustrate not only the alteration of the ligand bonding but also alteration of the Rh-Rh bonding.
The XAFS spectrum for many of these predicted intermediates is quite different from those of the dominant species. The simulation shows that the catalyst is highly fluxional in nature and that the reacting Rh 4 cluster progresses through a broad range of transition states. The DFT simulations thus confirm findings from XAFS measurements that (1) the time-average structure is a Rh 4 cluster, (2) the Rh-B and Rh-Rh bond distances are in agreement with the experimental values, and (3) the primary ligand on the Rh binds through a B and not N (of amine borane). In summary, the DFT molecular dynamics sampling of the statistical ensemble of configurations provides remarkable agreement with the XAFS spectrum measured under reaction conditions. The combination of XAFS spectroscopy and simulation provides key insights into the active site and catalytic reaction pathways.

Alumina and Zeolite Structure at the Al Atomic Site
All of the previous examples have involved solution-phase or homogeneous systems. The MD-XAFS method is equally useful for solid phase samples (crystalline or amorphous). As an example, the Al K-edge XAFS spectra for two different crystalline materials are shown in Fig. 18.9 [36]. In Fig. 18.9a, the Al K-edge spectra of pure α-Al 2 O 3 (corundum) are shown. Figure 18.9b shows the spectrum for the Al tetrahedral sites (T-site) within an aluminosilicate zeolite (HBEA) that has an overall Al:Si ratio of 1:75. For these crystalline materials, the method of generating the MD trajectory is somewhat different than for solution phase spectra. The initial configuration for the MD simulation starts with the established crystal XRD structure. Further, in these examples, the density is fixed to the measured density. Finally, the MD trajectory at 300 K is generated to establish an ensemble of

Chemistry of Aqueous HCl
The chemical equilibrium between different states can be probed with XAFS under special circumstances when there are a limited number of structurally independent species. MD-XAFS has been used to explore the structure of concentrated aqueous HCl solutions [34]. The classical understanding of this solution is that the acid is fully dissociated into two noninteracting species, the hydrated anion (Cl À ) and the hydronium cation (H 3 O þ ). However, an earlier XAFS study [39] proposed that at moderate to high concentrations of HCl, the chloride and hydronium may exist as a contact ion pair species (Cl À -H 3 O þ ). Reprinted with permission from ref. [36]. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society Figure 18.10 compares the experimental and calculated Cl K-edge spectra for 2.5 m NaCl and 16 m HCl solutions. In the case of 2.5 m NaCl, it is well established that the first-shell hydration structure contains the fully solvated Cl À having approximately 6-7 water at a Cl-O distance of 3.14 Å. In Fig. 18.10a, for the concentrated HCl (6 m), there is a shortening of the distance for the main Cl-O peak and a reduction in the amplitude. This is the result of the formation of a new firstshell Cl À species due to the contact-ion pairing with H 3 O þ that resides at a Cl-O distance that is about 0.2 Å shorter. There is excellent agreement between the experimental and the MD-XAFS spectra. In addition, as shown in Fig. 18.10b, c, the structural parameters of the ion pair bond distances and coordination numbers are in excellent agreement. The overall MD-XAFS analysis creates a new picture where there is extensive ion pairing in acid solutions even at moderate concentrations [34]. This demonstrates that, instead of being a neutral noninteracting species, Cl À is an active participant in the chemistry that defines the pH scale through its ion pairing with H 3 O þ .

Summary
MD-XAFS is such a powerful technique and simulation capabilities have advanced to the point where it is practical to make it a common practice in the analysis of complex systems. It is an analytical probe of structure, competing with other x-ray as well as neutron diffraction techniques. Similar quality information that

Introduction
Metal nanoparticles (NPs) under several tens of nanometers in size have unique mechanical, optical, electronic, and catalytic properties that are different from their bulk counterparts [1][2][3][4][5]. Structural characterization of NPs is a key to answering many questions related to their catalytic properties, for example, what is the nature of catalytically active sites, or what are the reasons for their catalytic activity, selectivity, and stability. Various structural, geometric, and electronic characteristics were named "descriptors" of catalytic properties in transition metal catalysts, such as the number of under-coordinated sites [6,7], or perimeter sites [7,8], or number of (111) crystalline facets [9], or surface strain [10], or the position of the D-states relative to the Fermi level (a "D-band center" model) [11][12][13][14][15]. The main challenge preventing direct measurements of those characteristics is the small size of nanoparticles. Indeed, in size range of several nanometers, there are very few techniques capable of characterizing structure and electronic properties with sufficient spatial and energy resolutions. A challenge specific to catalysts is the need to monitor their structure and electronic properties in situ, during their work, also known as "in operando conditions." That latter requirement is particularly challenging to electron microscopy and other imaging techniques that are severely limited in use by requirements of high pressure and temperature, typical for many catalytic reactions. Other structural characterization techniques such as X-ray diffraction are limited by the small size of the nanoparticles that is responsible for broadening Bragg peaks used for structural refinement. XAFS analysis methods are excellent alternatives to imaging and scattering methods due to the excellent spatial, temporal, and energy resolutions of XAFS, and due to the relative ease of its application to real-time processes in operando conditions. In recent years, it became progressively more appreciated that supported NPs are complex systems whose catalytic properties are influenced not only by the structure of the particle but also in not a small degree by its interaction with support and adsorbates. In this chapter, we review the main attributes of supported NPs that affect their catalytic activities, recent solutions to the structural characterization of NPs and describe recent advances in solving three-dimensional structure, degree of alloying, and their changes under conditions of model and real catalytic reactions.

Size, Shape, Strain, Support, and Composition Effects on Catalytic Properties
With the decrease of particle size, the surface to volume ratio increases, shifting the balance between the surface and the bulk energies in favor of the former. Enhanced surface energy is responsible for generating substantial surface strain [16,17], that can be relieved by some adsorbates, e.g., hydrogen [5,18,19]. The enhanced surface stress causes contraction of surface metal-metal bond length [16,20,21]. The surface energy and surface stress thus have important influence on the elastic properties of NPs.
In nanocatalysts strain is a ubiquitous attribute of their structure. It dominates the surface and support interface regions, and, in the case of bimetallics, is also present throughout the bulk, due to the size mismatch of two types of metals [10,16,[22][23][24][25]. The increased surface strain results in the shift of D-band center [10,[26][27][28] which tunes the binding energy between surface atoms and adsorbed molecules [10][11][12], and changes cohesive energy of surface atoms which alters the thermodynamic properties and stiffness of NPs [17,29].
Electronic structure of NPs could also be modified through the change of particle size. Lowering the coordination number of NPs causes the tendency towards localization of the valence electrons and gap formation, hence, the transition from metallic (at large sizes) to nonmetallic (in small sizes) properties. Another consequence of decreasing particle size is thus the reduction of the width of valence band and the shift of its center of gravity towards Fermi level which leads to an increase of the adsorption energy of adsorbate and a decrease of the dissociation barriers of adsorbed molecules [13,14,30]. For transition metals catalysts, their properties could thus be tailored through the D-band center position relative to the Fermi energy by changing the composition (adding different metal atoms) [13,15,31], surface strain, support material [32][33][34][35], or adsorbate coverage [12].
NPs with various shapes expose different facets, which may have different properties with respect to catalysis in the course of the same reaction [36,37]. In addition, different surface types contain different fractions of under-coordinated atoms (on edge and vertex), which are considered to be the active sites in many reactions [6][7][8][9]. Shapes of NPs are shown to change with size [38], however, when particles are extremely small, and they could adopt various geometries with comparable energies. The fluctuation of geometries and structures could lower the reaction barrier [39,40]. Finally, the nanoparticles can coexist in the ordered and disordered states in the same size range, and their fractions can change in reaction condition, further hampering efforts in their characterization and thus understanding catalytic mechanisms [18].
Most heterogeneous nanocatalysts are deposited on supports, which distort the atomic structure of the interfacial layer in contact with the substrate, creating defects, strain at interface and may even change the shape of NPs [22,32,33]. On the other side, supports with different reducibility have different influences on the electronic structure of NPs. These structural and electronic factors control the metal/support adhesion energy, which affects chemical potentials of surface atoms and their binding ability to small adsorbates [35].
The addition of the second metal to monometallic systems was found to be an effective way to tune the properties and structures of nanocatalysts. The possible mixing patterns of bimetallic systems reported in literature vary from random alloys, core-shell, cluster-by-cluster, and other architectures, depending on the elements, their compositions and synthesis conditions [41,42]. The introduction of the second metal could introduce strain, alter the electronic structure and, hence, the D-band center position, which greatly affects the interaction between the surface atoms and adsorbates. Many bimetallic systems were reported to change their structure and/or compositional motifs in response to the changes in the environmental conditions or in the process of catalytic reactions [43][44][45]. Tracking the structural changes of bimetallic systems in operando mode, that is, during real reaction conditions, while monitoring the reaction in real time, is thus quite important for revealing their working mechanisms.

Experimental Characterization of Nanoparticle
Structure and Electronic Properties: The Uniqueness of XANES and EXAFS X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and electron microscopy are commonly used techniques for bulk or surface structure characterization. When particle size is in nanometer range, XRD is not very helpful due to the Bragg peak broadening. Electron microscopy, on the other hand, has very high resolving power, which helps reveal the atomic and surface structure of NPs [46]. However, if used in situ, only part of the ensemble of catalytic species can be reliably detected (above the resolution limit) and reports of applications of TEM to operando studies are still scarce. X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), on the other hand, can be done in a number of sample conditions (liquid or gas, low or high temperatures and pressures) [47][48][49][50][51][52], and a number of reactor cells are available to date [53][54][55][56][57]. Its sensitivity to local structure and elemental specificity make it uniquely fitting for studying nanomaterials. With the development of the analytical methods for XANES and EXAFS interpretation, a lot of information related to the physical properties of nanomaterials, such as stress-induced bond length change and disorder [19,22,58], three-dimensional geometry of small clusters [59,60], electronic structure modification driven by support/environment [61], and mixing pattern of bimetallic systems [45,62,63], could be obtained. In recent years, with the proliferation of in situ and operando methods of catalyst characterization, combination of XAFS with other techniques (IR, Raman, XRD, NMR, UV-Vis, etc.) helped illuminate cooperative phenomena at the interfaces between nanoparticle, surface species, and support under realistic working conditions [43,50,56,[74][75][76][77][78][79][80][81][82][83][84][85][86][87][88].
In the following sections, we review recent progress in structural characterization of nanocatalysts by EXAFS methods.

Size and Geometry of Nanocatalysts by Coordination Number Analysis
Historically, the importance of EXAFS for catalysis studies [89] was realized almost immediately after XAFS was recognized as a new method of studying local structure in 1970s [90][91][92][93][94]. First works used it for measuring coordination numbers of supported monometallic and heterometallic NPs to obtain their average size (only first shell/single scattering analysis was possible) [95][96][97][98]. Then, with the development of multiple scattering (in the 1990s) [99] more advanced analysis methods were developed for determination of cluster size, shape, morphology, and mixing pattern in bimetallic systems. Information about the atomic architecture (three-dimensional packing of atoms) in a representative NP can be most directly gleaned from the coordination number of first nearest neighboring metal-metal bonds. The coordination number (n AA(i) ) of the ith shell with the radius R i around the absorbing atom in a monometallic cluster is defined as the average number, per absorber, of nearest neighbors within a given shell:
Here N AA(i) is the total number of the A-A nearest neighbors within the same coordination shell, and N A is the total number of A-type atoms in the cluster. The factor of two in Eq. (19.1) is due to the fact that each atom of the A-A pair is an absorber and thus the number of these pairs should be doubled in calculating the A-A coordination numbers. Coordination numbers are obtained model-independently from data analysis of experimental EXAFS spectra. The most important information that is available via the coordination number analysis is the average particle size, and several methods are available for its determination from the EXAFS coordination numbers [100].
One such method, developed by Calvin et al. [101], assumes homogeneous spherical shape of clusters with the radius R. For atoms in the ith shell around the absorbing atom, the coordination number of the ith shell (N nano(i) ) can be expressed as follows:
In Eq. (19.2), r i is the distance between the absorbing atom and neighboring atoms in the ith shell, and N bulk(i) is the ith shell coordination number of bulk structure. This method allows the calculation of coordination number of an arbitrary coordination shell as a function of the cluster size, which in principle, can be used to discriminate between symmetric (quasi-spherical) and asymmetric clusters if the coordination numbers of the higher-order shells are measured by EXAFS. One disadvantage of this method is that it is limited to sufficiently large clusters (with number of atoms much larger than 100) [60].
Another useful method for estimating cluster size is comparing the first nearest coordination number (N 1 ) obtained from EXAFS analysis against model structures with known geometrical characteristics. For regular polyhedra (e.g., a cuboctahedron or an icosahedron), N 1 is a function of cluster order L, which is defined as the number of spacing between adjacent atoms along the edge (see example of L ¼ 2 in Fig. 19.1) [102]. This method developed by Montejano-Carrizales et al. [102,103], is easy to expand to other morphologies and cluster families [59]. For example, the truncated cuboctahedral model with the (111) plane parallel to the support is most close to the morphology found in many supported metal clusters (Fig. 19.1). The relationship between N 1 and L in a truncated cuboctahedron is: [104] Fig. 19.1 Schematic of a truncated cuboctahedral cluster with 37 atoms (L ¼ 2)
For truncated cuboctahedron with atom numbers of 10 (L ¼ 1), 37 (L ¼ 2), 92 (L ¼ 3), and 185 (L ¼ 4), the first nearest coordination numbers are 4.8, 7.0, 8.2, and 8.9, respectively. Another method that is useful in the case when there is no particular symmetry known in advance, and/or nearest neighboring shells cannot be easily identified but the coordinates of atoms in the cluster are available from, e.g., first principle simulations, is the radial distribution function (RDF) method [59,105]. This approach, proposed by Frenkel and Glasner [59], employs computer-generated cluster coordinates. The cluster-average pair radial distribution function ρ(r) is computed for a cluster of N atoms:
where ρ i (r) is the partial RDF for an atom i, and dN i is the number of its neighbors within the spherical shell of thickness dR i . The subsequent calculation of coordination numbers for an arbitrary coordination shell (between R 1 and R 2 ) is achieved by integrating the ρ(r):
ρ r ð Þdr: ð19:5Þ
Compared to the two methods described above, the RDF method enables rapid calculation of coordination numbers of clusters with arbitrary sizes and shapes. By combining electron microscopy with multiple-scattering EXAFS analysis and data modeling, several geometries with the same sequence of coordination numbers of the nearest-neighbor shells can be discriminated [106,107]. The authors can be contacted for sharing their software program that performs RDF calculations for arbitrary cluster geometries.
The methods listed above for size estimation are strongly dependent on the knowledge of the first nearest coordination numbers that are, in turn, obtained reliably by EXAFS analysis if the bond length distribution is relatively symmetric [91,108]. For supported nanocatalysts under working conditions, the substrate and adsorbates may induce stress, causing the bond length distribution to deviate strongly from the Gaussian shape by for example relaxing the surface atoms stronger compared to the core [16]. The asymmetric disorder in bond lengths results in an artifact of the data analysis where, if ignored, it leads to the underestimate of the coordination numbers [109]. Therefore, anharmonic corrections should be taken into account for systems with large disorders. Several methods have been proposed recently that take into account the asymmetric disorder and use structural analysis of EXAFS data to validate different theoretical models [110][111][112]. They are described in greater detail below.
Including multiple-scattering effects to EXAFS data analysis is another way to improve the accuracy for size determination and is also crucial for extending structural refinement of nanocatlysts beyond first nearest bond distance. From the geometrical characteristics of regular polyhedral clusters, the sequence of coordination numbers of the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, etc. nearest neighboring pairs of atoms for different types of polyhedra is unique. That uniqueness is used for comparison with EXAFS results, obtained model-independently, for the same coordination numbers (and for degeneracies of multiple-scattering paths) to determine the size, shape, structure, and, in some cases, surface orientation of NPs [59,106,113]. One example of such analysis is the characterization of supported Pt clusters [60,106,114,115], which have been extensively studied by EXAFS to establish the relationship between cluster size, shape, and catalytic properties. The structural characteristics depend strongly on the preparation conditions and on the nature of support [6,22,107,116,117]. The demonstrations of the sensitivity of the cluster shape to the support and treatment conditions are shown in the following examples. The fully reduced γ-Al 2 O 3 supported Pt NPs have a spherical structure through a preparative method of deposition precipitation [118] while PVP capped Pt NPs changed from spherical to flat structure after the particles were deposit on SiO 2 support [119]. In another example, the 1 wt% Pt/γ-Al 2 O 3 catalyst containing 11 Pt atoms was three-dimensional after low temperature reduction (300 C) and changed to the raft shape with the structure similar to Pt (100) after high temperature reduction (450 C) [120]. Interestingly, for Pt/zeolite, the three-dimensional structure was retained after high temperature treatment [121].
As an example of the multiple scattering EXAFS analysis of the cluster shape, we use the structural modeling of carbon supported Pt NPs up to the 4th/5th Pt-Pt shell [106,114]. Figure 19.2 illustrates such analysis for size and shape determination and shows that the (111)-truncated hemispherical cuboctahedron provides good approximation for the 10 wt% Pt/C sample, with a particles size of about 1.7 nm [106]. To find connections between particle shape and catalytic properties, γ-Al 2 O 3 supported Pt NPs with various shapes but analogous average size (~1 nm) were prepared and characterized by multiple-scattering analysis (up to 4th shell) of EXAFS data in combination with microscopic tools [107]. The shape having higher percentage of undercoordinated atoms (at edge or corner sites) on the surface was found effective for lowering the onset temperature for two-propanol oxidation [6].
A more approximate method that also relies on the coordination numbers of higher shells for determining the size and shape of NPs was proposed by A. Jentys [122]. This method modeled the first five coordination numbers as a function of particle size with a hyperbolic function for particles with shapes of spheres, cubes, and distorted cubes. The coordination number of the first (n 1 ) or second shell (n 2 ) was found independent with shape and thus used to estimate the average particle size. The curves of n 1 /n 3 versus particle size were found to be different for different shapes. The shape can therefore be determined by comparing the curve of experimentally determined n 1 /n 3 ratio with the model n 1 /n 3 graph. Such analysis was expanded by Beale and Weckhuysen to larger number of shapes [123].

Using EXAFS to Characterize Bimetallic Nanocatalysts
Methods of high precision synthesis of bimetallic NPs for catalysis and electrocatalysis are actively sought, due to the increased demand to minimize the use of noble metals and for rational design of catalysts with desired activity and selectivity, and increased stability [42,[124][125][126][127][128][129][130][131]. Analogously to the definition of the coordination number for a homo-metallic pair, for heterometallic bonds, the coordination number is defined as:
The information on the homo-and hetero-metallic coordination numbers n AA , n AB , n BA , and n BB is available from EXAFS measurements on the absorption edges of both A and B central atoms [25]. The analysis should be done for both edges concurrently, with constraints imposed on the heterometallic bonds during the fits:
Just as in the case of monometallic catalysts, multiple-scattering analysis of bimetallic catalysts allows for measurements of coordination numbers within the first few shells [114,132]. These parameters elucidate the intra-particle composition, such as the extent of segregation or alloying of atoms, e.g., random distribution, as opposed to the positive or negative tendency to clustering [60,[132][133][134][135][136][137][138][139][140]. Once the above parameters are known, the total coordination number of metal-metal (M-M) neighbors per absorbing atom can be found from: [60]
ð19:8Þ
The total coordination number can be employed to determine the size and shape using the same methods applied to monometallic particles described above.
For heterogeneouse distributions, the main question in the EXAFS analysis of bimetallic NPs is to detect a certain architectrual motif, e.g., a core-shell or clusterto-cluster [41,42,45]. When atoms of the type A will segregate to the surface of the nanoparticle and B-to the core, then n AM < n BM [60]. For random alloys, the average coordination numbers n AA and n AB are in the same proportion as the bulk concentrations of these elements in the sample: [60] n AA n AB ¼ x A x B : ð19:9Þ
For alloys with positive tendency to clustering of like atoms, e.g., when either the intraparticle or interparticle segregation is present, the left hand side should be larger than the right hand side:
x B : ð19:10Þ
For homogeneous alloys (Fig. 19.3, center) in which the atoms A and B occur with equal probability within the particle or on the surface: n AM ¼ n BM [60]. Interpretation of the coordination numbers in heterogeneous systems in terms of a "representative cluster" can be misleading. We will discuss two commonly encountered systems that require particular care. One example is when two different NP systems differ in homogeneity of their atomic distributions, and the otherin the degree of their randomness. First, we consider a homogeneous system where all atoms have similar local environments within each NP. Two cartoons depicting two dimensional "nanoparticles" with this type of structure are shown in the Fig. 19.4a, b. Although the lattices are differently ordered, both types of atoms contain a similar number of neighbors for each element throughout the "cluster." The similarity becomes nearly perfect when the surface to volume ratio becomes negligible, i.e., for particles larger than 4-5 nm in diameter. Such atomic arrangements are homogeneous, as there is an equal probability to find any given atom type (A or B) anywhere within the NP. An example showing the other extreme is presented in the two cartoons in the Fig. 19.4d where the atoms of each type (A or B) are segregated within different part of the NP.
The second case we briefly discuss is when the two NP systems differ in the randomness of their atomic distributions. This characteristic will only apply to the homogeneous systems such as two NPs shown in Fig. 19.4a, b, because the two NPs shown in Fig. 19.4c, d are heterogeneous, i.e., inherently nonrandom. The cluster on the Fig. 19.4a has perfect order: both atomic types have equivalent surroundings. The cluster in Fig. 19.4b is random: for either atom (of type A or B), the probabilities of neighboring atoms being either type A or B are equal. One important consequence apparent from this simple example is the difference between the Reproduced with permission from ref. [62]. Copyright 2013, AIP Publishing LLC short range order and homogeneity. For example, an alloy can be homogeneous but have a "negative tendency to clustering" (i.e., short range order) and is a phenomenon frequently encountered in metallurgy [141,142].
These two examples illustrate the importance of understanding the short range order and homogeneity of bimetallic NPs when attempting to characterize their structure. It turns out that both of these can be quantitatively expressed using J. Cowley's short range order parameter introduced recently for bimetallic NP analysis by Frenkel, et al.: [143][144][145]
where x B is the molar concentration of B-type atoms in the sample. As we show below, the Cowley parameter (α can vary in the interval between À1 and 1) can be used to investigate the degree of alloying or clustering within bimetallic NPs based on how positive/negative it is. In many cases, it can be used also as a "litmus test" demonstrating that atomic segregation, of either intra-cluster or inter-cluster type, occurred. We note that this equation has been previously employed in EXAFS studies of bulk bimetallic alloys [24] but its potential in NP studies remains unexplored.
For alloys that favor (disfavor) clustering of like atoms, α will be positive (negative). This parameter is therefore essential for studies of alloy-or coreshell, or cluster-on-cluster-NPs that can be characterized by different levels of ordering. Only after the short range order parameter is evaluated, can different models of segregation be compared. In either case, additional experimental information is needed to determine the fine detail of segregation, i.e., whether for example element A is predominantly at the surface or in the core. The analogue of the effect of compositional heterogeneity on the interpretation of the short range order within a "representative" NP is the interpretation of the size of the "representative" NP from EXAFS coordination numbers. In each case, an independent technique is needed, and in the latter case, the average particle size can be measured by electron microscopy.
We emphasize that the role of measuring and evaluating α extends beyond merely determining whether it is positive or negative. Even large negative values of α may signal segregation as there is only a finite range α min α 0 in which homogeneous systems can exist [143]. For example, α min ¼ À1 for two dimensional AB alloys shown in Fig. 19.4a, for β-brass CuZn of bcc structure [143], but it can also be fractional, e.g., α min ¼ À1/3 for fcc Cu 0.75 Au 0.25 alloys [143]. Hence, if the measured value of α falls within either À1 α α min or 0 < α 1 interval, the system is heterogeneous and the segregation of atoms is evident. Finally, we note that these conclusions were obtained assuming an idealized case where all particles are equivalent and the segregation may occur only within the NP. If the bimetallic composition varies from one NP to another, even random compositional distribution may generate positive values of α, a point which is discussed in greater detail below.

Pitfalls and Artifacts of the Analysis
In studies of the structure of NPs, coordination numbers are the most important structural parameters that can be obtained from EXAFS analysis. Coordination numbers of the first nearest neighbors (1NN) of X-ray absorbing atoms are obtained by EXAFS analysis very reliably, and are often employed for characterizing nanoclusters in terms of their structure, size, shape, and morphology [100,106,114,146]. Coordination numbers of atomic pairs in bimetallic NPs are often used to discriminate between different types of short range order in the NPs, and/or ascertain the degree of compositional homogeneity in the sample [60,100,147]. In this section we emphasize the pitfalls in such interpretation when nanoparticle ensembles display a broad range of sizes and compositions. We show the implications of these effects on EXAFS results and describe corrective strategies.
The values of partial coordination numbers are important for analyzing composition habits of heterometallic clusters. For example, depending on the relationship between the partial 1NN numbers and the bulk composition of the nanoalloy, the latter is characterized as either homogeneous (when average environment around each atom is approximately the same) or heterogeneous (when different regions within the sample have different compositional trends, e.g., A-rich and B-rich, or when such segregation occurs within each cluster, e.g., A-rich core and B-rich shell) [147]. For homogeneous alloys, relationships (19.9) and (19.10) can be used to describe the short range order [60]. In this section we focus on random nanoalloys (that have zero short range order) and highlight challenges in their detection by EXAFS.
We now introduce the total coordination number of metal-metal pair, or n MM which is equal to n 1 for monometallic clusters. For bulk alloys, when atoms of type A and B are distributed randomly, their partial coordination numbers are found from the overall compositions:
where the composition is defined as:
In a nanocluster with random compositional distribution, more accurate relationships should be used: [100]
We note that in random nanoalloys, same as in the bulk random alloys,
but in the nanoalloys the sum of n AA and n BB is smaller than n MM : We have recently shown [100] that alloys with broad compositional distributions are expected to have positive values for the ensemble-average short range order despite having random intra-particle distribution of atoms. Hence, a random nanoalloy may be mistaken as a system with a core-shell motif if the NPs are not all stoichiometrically uniform. This prediction can be illustrated by the following simple example. Assume that the sample consists of two groups of bimetallic NPs. The first group consists of N particles where 30 % of all atoms are A-type and 70 %-B-type in each. The second group consists of N particles of 70 % and 30 % of A and B-type atoms, respectively. The average composition over the entire sample is then 50 % of A and 50 % of B atoms. Assume also that the distribution of atoms in each particle is random, i.e., the value of α calculated over each population is zero. Finally, assume that the geometry of all particles is the same and atoms occupy regular lattice sites. Ensemble-average calculation of the coordination numbers of AB type yields the following result: N AB ¼ 0.3 Â 0.7 N AM þ0.7 Â 0.3 N AM ¼ 0.42 N AM . Hence, the ensemble-average value of α measured by EXAFS will be equal to 0.16 (Eq. 19.11), in apparent contradiction to the local randomness (α ¼ 0) of each population. What follows is the more general demonstration of this effect [100,148].
We assume that within each cluster, atoms of type A and B are distributed randomly, but x A is different for each nanoparticle. For simplicity, we consider a Fig. 19.5 (a) Exact (solid lines, Eq. 19.13) and approximate (dashed lines, Eq. 19.12) behaviors of the coordination numbers of A-A pairs for different cluster sizes. (b) Coordination numbers of different atomic pairs in random, 13-atom, cuboctahedral alloys. Solid lines correspond to exact calculations using Eq. 19.13 and dashed lines correspond to approximate calculations using Eq. 19.12. Reproduced from ref. [149] by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry system that contains particles of the same structure and geometry. Effects of cluster size distribution [100] and asymmetric bond length disorder [109] on the apparent coordination numbers have been described separately. We distinguish between the particle-specific coordination number n AA (calculated with Eq. (19.13)) in the cluster with the concentration x A of A atoms, and the apparent (measured) coordination number e n AA , which, in EXAFS measurement, averages the number of A nearest neighbors over all the A-type atoms in all clusters in the sample. We let the interparticle compositional distribution of x A (denoted below as simply x) be a Gaussian with standard deviation σ c and mean x:
ð19:15Þ
In EXAFS signal, clusters with a greater number of A atoms are weighted more than the clusters with fewer A atoms. We thus write the apparent partial coordination numbers as:   [148] by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry only) on the left corresponds to narrow inter-cluster compositional distribution (i.e., small σ c ). Three clusters on the right illustrate the change in composition from cluster to cluster (large σ c ). In all cases, the intra-cluster distributions are random.
These results indicate that the ensemble-average coordination numbers e n AA can be smaller for narrow compositional distributions or larger for broad distributions than the coordination numbers predicted by the equation n AA ¼ xn MM . The reason they are smaller for narrow distributions than the nominal coordination numbers was demonstrated above (Eq. 19.13 and Fig. 19.5b). For broad distributions, the effect is due to the ensemble-averaging that favors A-rich clusters over the B-rich clusters (relative to x A ). Similar conclusions can be extended to the other partial coordination numbers. The two sets of values, e n AA and n AA , as well as e n AB and n AB , agree for σ c ¼ ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffi
, for which the normal distribution coincides with binomial distribution.
In summary, partial coordination numbers in heterometallic NPs can be employed to accurately quantify the intra-particle homogeneity and short-range order for arbitrary cluster sizes and a wide range of component fractions, provided that all the clusters possess nearly identical compositions. If the intra-cluster distribution is completely random but the elemental composition varies widely from cluster to cluster, the coordination numbers measured by EXAFS will point toward either negative ( e n AA < n AA ) or positive ( e n AA > n AA ) short range order, which, in the latter case, can be mistaken for a core-shell motif, among other segregation scenarios, even though all clusters are completely random. The only exception when the apparent coordination numbers coincide with those in the "mean" cluster is when the compositional distribution is binomial. With the knowledge of actual compositional distribution (e.g., using energy dispersive X-ray analysis done in electron microscopy experiment) it is possible to correct apparent coordination numbers for the compositional distribution effects (Fig. 19.6).

Overlapping Absorption Edges
Heterometallic systems containing two or more elements with overlapping absorption edges cannot be simply analyzed by EXAFS since the EXAFS at the higher energy edge overlaps with the EXAFS extending from the lower energy edge. This is a particularly significant problem for metals that neighbor each other in the periodic table such as Re, Ir, Pt, and Au, whose L 3 , L 2 , and L 1 absorption edges overlap. Unless these overlapping contributions are disentangled, extracting structural information from the data via traditional data analysis strategies is either not possible [149,150] or difficult and/or insufficiently accurate [151].
The problem of overlapping edges in EXAFS analysis is not limited to heterometallic catalysts, of course. BaTiO 3 is among the most extensively studied perovskites, yet its EXAFS studies are complicated due to the overlap of Ti K-edge and Ba L 3 edge. B. Ravel et al. proposed a very original use of diffraction anomalous fine structure (DAFS) technique to deconvolute the EXAFS signals from Ti and Ba [152,153]. Other methods have appeared recently, based on the use of the high energy resolution fluorescence detection (HERFD) that enabled separation of emission lines from different elements [85,[154][155][156].
Menard et al. reported a new method for deconvolution of overlapping absorption edges that is based on the use of concurrent, multiple edge analysis of EXAFS data from each edge [63]. The analysis strategy is demonstrated here for an arbitrary bimetallic composition even though, for illustration purpose only, they used notation Ir and Pt for its constituent elements. Data analysis is done by a simultaneous fit of both Ir L 3 and Pt L 3 edges, which involve three contributions: (1) the Ir EXAFS in the Ir L 3 edge before the Pt L 3 edge; (2) the Ir EXAFS in the Pt L 3 edge; and
(3) the Pt EXAFS in the Pt L 3 edge. Because (1) and ( 2) describe the same coordination environments they should be constrained analytically, in the process of fitting each contribution to the experimental data. The analysis is done in r-space and is limited to nearest neighbor scattering paths, which are usually well isolated from longer scattering paths in the Fourier transforms of the EXAFS signal χ(k). In this case, the EXAFS equations that are simultaneously fit are:
Ir e À2R Ir =λ Ir k Ir ð Þ :

ð19:18Þ
The factor A ¼ Δμ 0,Ir /Δμ 0,Pt , where Δμ 0,Ir and Δμ 0,Pt are the changes in the absorption at the edge steps, is necessary because the extraction of χ(k) includes a normalization to these edge steps. The nonlinear least squares fitting of experimental data to Eqs. (19.17 and 19.18) should be done concurrently to the overlapping L 3 edges and can be achieved using available EXAFS analysis tools. In ref. [63], the interface programs Athena and Artemis were used. In practice, correction of the energy grid in k-space for the Ir EXAFS in the Pt L 3 edge should be made. The correction to the threshold energy (in eV) for the Ir EXAFS in the Pt L 3 edge is defined as ΔE 0,Ir À (349 þ ΔE 0,Pt ), where 349 eV is the difference between the empirical threshold energies. Such a large energy origin shift is necessary in this method since it accounts for a unique k ¼ 0 reference point for the Ir EXAFS extending beyond the Pt edge when the Pt edge EXAFS is transformed to k-space. The exact value to use (here 349 eV) will depend on the E 0 values that are used in the edge subtraction of the EXAFS spectra. The representative data and fits in r-space are shown in Fig. 19.7. The signature of the Ir L 3 EXAFS "leaking" into the Pt L 3 EXAFS is a low r feature in Fig. 19.7b.

Outlook and Future Developments
With the ongoing development of X-ray absorption spectroscopy techniques, the opportunities for investigation of mechanisms of catalytic reactions employing nanoscale metal catalysts are growing and new challenges, previously ignored or overlooked, come to the surface. One such important challenge is the heterogeneity of the NP ensembles that is evident even in samples with narrow size and compositional distributions and is a common property of real catalysts with large compositional gradients. That heterogeneity, when ignored, causes artifacts in data analysis, as demonstrated above in the case of the compositional heterogeneity, and is also shown by Yevick and Frenkel [109] for the case of the structural heterogeneity due to surface relaxation in nm-scale clusters.
One possible solution is the single nanoparticle spectroscopy studies by XAS methods [157]. Current and future capabilities of X-ray spectromicroscopy based on coherence-limited imaging methods including nano-probe methods were discussed by Hitchcock and Toney [158]. These methods will benefit from the dramatic increase in brightness expected from a diffraction-limited storage ring. The applicability of nano-probe methods for spectroscopy studies of single NPs was illustrated by Y. Chu's group. They studied the oxidation process of individual PtNi NPs by a scanning multilayer Laue lens X-ray microscope and discovered the transformation of alloyed PtNi (140 to 320 nm) to Pt/NiO core-shell and the further Reproduced with permission from ref. [63] coalescence under thermal oxidation [159]. The scanning was performed using 10 nm step size and 30 nm focal spot size at beamline 26ID of the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory. This method is being developed for to the hard X-ray nanoprobe (HXN) beamline of the National Synchrotron Light Source II at BNL. Alternatively, photoemission electron microscopy was used for studying of individual Co NPs with the size of 8 nm. Significant variations in the shapes of the Co L 2,3 edges of the X-ray absorption spectra between different cobalt NPs were detected and attributed to different cobalt-oxygen interactions on a particle-byparticle basis [160]. For these spectromicroscopic methods on the basis of nanoprobe, the main challenge is to keep high flux while reducing the spot size. More details on challenges and limitations of nano-probe methods for catalytic investigations were addressed recently by Frenkel and van Bokhoven [157].
Studying nanocatalysts at the single-nanoparticle level and in operando mode adds more challenges. For spectroscopic methods, the key is to increase particle sensitivity and for electron microscopic methods it's to enable realistic working conditions. In most electron microscopy studies of catalysis, they were either investigated in an ex-situ mode, i.e., catalysts were pretreated elsewhere under controlled conditions of atmosphere, pressure and temperature, while measured under high vacuum at low temperatures, or under simulated working conditions with lower temperature and pressure compared to the real ones [46,161,162]. To bridge this "pressure gap", a new mode of operation is needed, where relevant (for structural analysis) techniques can probe catalysts in the same reaction conditions. Recently, Stach and Frenkel demonstrated the advantage of using such a micro-reactor, for nanocatalysis studies at ambient temperature and pressure [104]. Basing on the idea of combining electron microscopy with spectroscopic techniques by sharing the same reactor to make sure samples/conditions under study are the same for all types of techniques [163,164], the group discovered the complex structural dynamics of Pt/SiO 2 under ethylene hydrogenation conditions that occurs at broad length scale [104].
In conclusion, with the development of XAFS instrumentation and analysis methods, the understanding of structure of nanoparticle catalysts is advanced from qualitative pictures of the mid-70s to much more quantitative ones that are capable to capture fine architectural and compositional details, and account for interparticle and intraparticle heterogeneities. More achievements are expected in the coming years, owing to the reduced beam sizes, improved energy and time resolutions, and new developments in the combinations of XAFS with complementary imaging and scattering methods in operando conditions.

Introduction
Oxide materials find widespread application in industry, for example as semiconductor, solar cell, catalyst, and sensor. New materials and applications continue to be reported, which is a main driver for technological development and slowly makes our society more sustainable. The function of these materials strongly depends on their structure, which is why their structural characterization receives much attention.
Zeolites are an important class of microporous crystalline oxides and they find widespread application as catalyst and catalyst support. [1][2][3] Within the refinery, they are the dominant catalysts, because of their unique structure, guaranteeing shape-selectivity, and thermal stability. Zeolites are crystalline alumina-silicates. They are micro-porous and therefore have very large surface areas. Silicon and aluminum atoms are tetrahedrally coordinated by bridging oxygen atoms. [4,5] Because there is a charge imbalance for every framework aluminum, cations are located in the zeolite pores, for each aluminum one cationic charge [6]. These cations give zeolites their catalytic function, such as a Brønsted acid in case of proton-exchanged zeolites and Lewis or redox function in case of cations [7], such as iron [8] and copper. These extra-framework species catalyze a wide range of redox reactions, notably oxidation. Unique features are their stability, induced by the space-restricting functionality of the pores and their ability to perform oxidation reactions selectively [9][10][11][12][13][14]. Instead of aluminum, other atoms may replace silicon, which imply different activity: redox chemistry is for example done over titanium containing Ti-silicalite [15][16][17]. Figure 20.1 illustrates a zeolite structure, notably zeolite Y or faujasite with its preferred extra-framework cation sites.
X-ray absorption-based methods have played an important role in determining the structure of the framework and extra-framework species in the zeolite structure, as recently summarized [17]. X-ray-based techniques are attractive, because of their versatile applicability [18][19][20][21][22]. They yield electronic and geometric structures and can be applied under in situ conditions. Thus, a functioning material, such as a sensor, battery [23], and catalyst [24], can be structurally characterized while it performs its function. This chapter concerns the structure of extra-framework copper species in zeolites as determined by X-ray based spectroscopic methods. The focus is on copper-based zeolites, because of their large academic and commercial interest. Copper-exchanged zeolites enjoy large academic and industrial interest. They are active catalysts for selective catalytic reduction (SCR), which converts nitrogen oxides into di-nitrogen and water [25][26][27][28][29][30]. This reaction finds widespread application in stationary and mobile exhaust control. Diesel engines on ships, trains and automobiles contain SCR catalysts, which consist of base metal oxides, such as tungsten, vanadium, and molybdenum, of precious metals, or of transition metal ions on zeolite supports. One of the most-studied ones is copper-exchanged zeolites [31]. Contemporary research focuses on the reaction mechanism and the identification of the catalytically active sites [27][28][29][30]. Here, in situ and operando X-ray absorption measurements are reviewed to provide the state of the art in site and mechanism elucidation.
A second major research field of copper-exchanged zeolites is the selective conversion of methane to methanol. Because of the higher reactivity of methanol compared to methane, the direct conversion of methane to methanol using oxygen is restricted to low conversion, because of carbon dioxide formation [32]. For this reason, methane is commercially converted into methanol via syngas production and its subsequent conversion into methanol [33,34]. Such process is cost intensive and not suitable for small-scale operation. Methane is abundantly available, however, often at stranded locations and therefore flared, observable from outer space by pictures of the earth by night. An equivalent to one quarter of the European energy use is put to waste. Direct conversion of methane into a liquid, such as methanol, would enable transporting it, and making its conversion into fuels or chemicals possible, representing an enormous increase in value.

Brief Historical Overview
Copper-exchanged zeolites have been widely investigated after the discovery in the early 90s by the Iwamoto group [31,35,36] and by Li and Hall [37,38] that Cu-ZSM-5 are active in the direct decomposition of nitric oxide to nitrogen and oxygen [39]. The study of this catalytic process has deserved a great practical interest, as nitric oxides are known to be a major cause of air pollution [40]. Successively, other Cu-exchanged zeolites have shown to be active in the selective catalytic reduction of NOx such as MOR, X, Y, USY, and IM5. X-ray absorption spectroscopies, both XANES and EXAFS played a key role in the investigation of the coordination and oxidation state of copper species in such systems in the activated forms and under different reaction conditions [41][42][43][44][45][46][47][48][49].
More recently, the Cu-exchanged form of the novel SSZ-13 zeolite, with CHA framework and high Si/Al ratio, is attracting a lot of attention due to its outstanding performance in NH 3 -assisted selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of NO x gases contained in the exhaust fumes from cars and industrial plants, in terms of activity and hydrothermal stability [25][26][27][28][29][30]. In order to explain such behavior and to develop the NH 3 -based SCR reaction mechanism many studies were performed by the groups all over the world involving a very broad range of characterization techniques, such as FTIR [7,50], UV-Vis [50], EPR [50], XRD [51], and so on, as recently reviewed by Beale et al. [52] Among them X-ray spectroscopy (both absorption [18,53] and emission [54]) is particularly useful due to its element selectivity, since the active sites of SCR reaction in Cu-SSZ-13 are low-abundance Cu ions hosted in the cavities of the zeolite framework. Careful analysis of EXAFS, XANES, and XES spectra, often assisted by the advanced DFT calculations, yields detailed information on the local environment and oxidation state of Cu centers in different reaction conditions [28-30, 52, 55-59]. In situ and operando studies, possible due to the high penetration depth of the hard X-rays (around 9 keV, corresponding to the Cu K-edge), provide the means to answer "chemical questions" concerning the reactivity of the Cu species towards particular gases at given temperatures, which is crucial for determining different steps of the reaction mechanism [18][19][20]53].
The structure of the Cu-CHA framework has been known since the 70s from the single crystal diffraction studies [60], that of Cu-SSZ-13 is similar, just with a lower Al and Cu content. It is composed of double six-membered rings (6-rings) connected in an AABBCC sequence, forming cavities with eight-membered windows (8-rings), see Fig. 20.2.

Determination of the Local Environment of Cu in SSZ-13 Upon Activation
Once Cu-SSZ-13 has shown its outstanding catalytic properties [25,26], the focus of the structural investigations was gradually shifted from the framework to the location of the isolated Cu ions in the hydrated and thermally activated material, which are the active sites of the SCR reaction. One of the first studies carried out by Fickel and Lobo demonstrated that the Cu ions tend to occupy the centers of the 6-rings [51]. Since every 6-ring is likely to have one negatively charged tetrahedral unit with Al substituting Si, the authors admitted, that Cu cations are expected to be shifted towards it from the center of the ring. However, XRD refinement was always converging to central position due to the lack of structural contrast. Nonetheless, it was possible to detect that, being always "projected" on the center of the 6-ring, the Cu ions were gradually approaching its plane upon calcination. The authors suggested that this effect may take place due to the dehydration of the Cu ions. Successively, Korhonen et al. presented Cu K-edge EXAFS data for both calcined and as-synthesized (hydrated) Cu-CHA [61] and analyzed the data using as starting model the previous theoretical structure of Cu in the 6-ring reported by Pierloot et al. [62] The fit resulted in adequate agreement with the experiment, confirming that Cu is indeed situated off-axis of the 6-ring. The very substantial shift of one of the oxygens in the 6-ring from the initial position during fitting was explained by the lower degree of deformation of the ring compared to the one predicted by DFT. First shell coordination numbers were determined as 4 for hydrated material and 3.2 for the calcined one. Presented XANES results also indicated the decrease of coordination upon dehydration due to the decrease of the white line intensity. Later the shift of the Cu ion from the center of the 6-ring was also confirmed by Deka et al. [63], by means of XANES simulations. Calculated spectrum of the model with Cu placed off-axis resulted in a much better agreement with the experimental data compared to the centered model.
Hydration issue was raised in more detail in the work of McEwen et al. [55] where it was demonstrated that Cu K-edge XANES spectrum of the as-synthesized Cu-SSZ-13 zeolite is very similar to the one of aqueous solution of Cu ions. This was further confirmed by Borfecchia et al. [59], who presented also a comparison of the EXAFS data for these two cases. High degree of similarity of both XANES and EXAFS data suggests that as long as the zeolite is exposed to air at room temperature, copper is covered by a shell of water molecules. Such shielding explains the lack of the framework contribution to the EXAFS data of the hydrated material and confirms the initial hypothesis of Fickel and Lobo [51]. At the same time, a substitution of one H 2 O molecule by OH À group cannot be excluded since these species are hardly distinguishable in EXAFS.
One of the most extensive spectroscopic studies of the Cu-SSZ-13 (Cu/Al ¼ 0.444, Si/Al ¼ 13.1) activation to date was carried out by Borfecchia et al. [59], who followed the activation in temperature up to 400 C in both O 2 / He and pure He flows with XANES, EXAFS, and valence-to-core XES spectroscopies. EXAFS-optimized experimental setup and rather high copper content in the sample allowed to achieve a very good data quality paving the way to a detailed quantitative analysis. XANES, EXAFS, and valence-to-core XES spectra, together with the optimized DFT models and corresponding XANES and XES simulations, are reported in Figs.  Upon activation in O 2 /He flux Cu(II) centers undergo progressive dehydration, while interacting more closely with the framework, keeping +2 oxidation state. Features typical for Cu(II) in low-symmetry environment were observed in XANES (Fig. 20.3a), while EXAFS witnesses the marked decrease of the first shell intensity due to the loss of the coordinated water molecules (Fig. 20.3b). Comparable evolution of the XANES spectra upon similar activation in oxidative environment was observed also by Kwak et al. [64] Conversely, as already observed for Cu(II)-ZSM-5 [47] and for Cu(II)-MOR [65] systems, upon activation in vacuum or in inert atmosphere (e.g., He flux) the Cu oxidation state did change to +1, as evidenced for the Cu(II)-SSZ-13 system by the disappearance of 1 s ! 3d transition and by the additional redshift of the edge, see Fig. 20.4a.
Most interestingly, the high-quality EXAFS data reveal that the coordination of Cu upon He-activation was further decreased compared to the activation in O 2 . Coupled with the observation that the reduction in He flow appears only at high temperature (T > 250 C), while at lower T the evolution of the spectra is identical to the O 2 -activation case, it indicates that a charged extra-ligand is still coordinated to Cu even at high temperature in case of O 2 -activation. This evidence support the hypothesis of the presence of an OH À ligand in the first coordination shell of Cu (II) as advanced in the IR study of Giordanino et al. [50] to assign the ν(OH) stretching mode at 3657 cm À1 .
The authors have further tested this hypothesis by performing a set of DFT simulations of Cu ions in different places of the framework and using the resulting structures as input for EXAFS fits and for the simulations of the high resolution fluorescence detected (HRFD) XANES and XES spectra, see parts (e) and (f) of Figs. 20.3 and 20.4. For the O 2 -activated material, the best overall agreement with the experimental data was obtained for the models of Cu(II) in the 8-ring, in form of a Cu (OH) complex, see Fig. 20.3c confirming the first assignment of the ν(OH) stretching mode at 3657 cm À1 [50]. While in case of He-activation it was a bare Cu(I) cation hosted mainly in the 8r, with a minority occupancy of the d6r site.

Understanding the SCR Mechanism
A large number of studies were devoted in the understanding of the SCR reaction mechanism over Cu-SSZ-13 system. In this regard remarkable efforts were invested into measuring XAS and XES spectra in different reaction-relevant conditions. We can divide such studies into two families The first concerns experiments in truly operando conditions, when the sample is exposed to the complete reaction mixture (including NO, NH 3 , O 2 , He, H 2 O, in some studies also NO 2 and CO 2 ) under controlled temperature. Most often such studies are performed in plug-flow reactors, such as the one described in the work of Kispersky et al. [66], collecting XAS and XES spectra of the catalyst in different reaction-relevant conditions. The interpretation of such data is intrinsically complicated, since several different Cu species forming on the different stages of the reaction may simultaneously contribute to the signal. The common approach to analyze such data is to measure also the spectra of the relevant reference materials, and, performing linear combination analysis, determine the relative contribution of each species to the spectrum of the catalyst under SCR conditions. Such strategy was adapted in the works of McEwen et al. [55] and of Bates et al. [56], where the samples with different Cu loadings were tested. Fitting the data with the Cu(I) and Cu(II) standards allowed the authors to determine the ratio between the amounts of Cu species of these oxidation states during the reaction.
The second strategy consists in probing separately different stages of SCR reaction thus testing the independently developed hypotheses regarding the behavior of the active sites in particular conditions. Such approach allowed Janssens et al. [30] to decouple the oxidation and reduction stages of the suggested SCR cycle, see Fig. 20.5. In particular, the authors have tested the effect of different red-ox agents, namely NO + O 2 mixture (gray curve), O (orange curve), NH 3 (blue curve), and their mixture (red curve), see Fig. 20.5a, b. The results clearly indicate that almost complete reduction occurs only after exposure to the mixture of NO and NH 3 . Resulting spectrum is characteristic for Cu + (NH 3 ) species in linear geometry [50]. Conversely, NO alone is not able to reduce Cu 2+ . Exposure to NH 3 alone leads only to a partial reduction accompanied by the formation of a linear Cu complex, while around 75 % of Cu species remain oxidized, presumably forming a planar tetra-amino complexes [30]. This study also revealed that the interaction of Cu (I) species with NO 2 and NO + O 2 results in the same Cu(II) species, see Fig. 20.5c, in agreement with the suggested mechanism, see Fig. 20.5d. The obtained complex was a bidentate Cu-NO 3 À , as evidenced by the EXAFS and XANES analysis. The XAS and XES data reported here, supported by parallel IR, EPR, and DFT studies, confirm the proposed scheme of the SCR reaction, resulting in greatly improved understanding of its chemistry.
A similar strategy of probing particular intermediate states of the reaction was adapted by the group of Grunwaldt [29] who used valence-to-core XES and HERFD XANES for characterizing different stages of SCR reaction. It was possible to detect the formation of Cu-N bond upon coordination of NH 3 monitoring the shift of Kβ'' satellite from 8956.9 to 8958.3 eV. Notably, no such shift was observed in the cases when NH 3 was absent from the feed, indicating thus the very weak coordination of NO to Cu accompanied by minor changes in Cu local environment [29].
Summarizing, in the past six years, due to the efforts of several independent research groups, there has been a marked advance in the understanding of the structure and reactivity of the active sites in Cu-SSZ-13 catalyst. As shown in this section, a significant part of the insights was gained by the element-selective XAS/XES studies, complemented by laboratory techniques and supported by DFT calculations. Several mechanisms of SCR reaction catalyzed by Cu-SSZ-13 were proposed based on the results of such multi-technique investigations [27][28][29][30]. Although there are still some contradictions in the literature regarding the stages of the reaction and the formed intermediates, there is no doubt that these issues will be eventually resolved in the coming up studies.

Methane to Methanol Over Copper-Exchanged Zeolites
As mentioned, the direct conversion of methane to methanol is very attractive; however, it is difficult. Over the years, a stepwise, chemical looping reaction has been developed over copper-exchanged zeolites [67][68][69]. The fundamental principle is to stabilize any intermediate from methane, which is thus prevented from further reacting [31]. The first such system is that of Periana [70], which is based on platinum bidiazine, which reacts methane to form a methyl ester. In a subsequent step, the methanol is produced. Analogously, in the Cu-zeolite, after high temperature activation in oxygen, methane is reacted between 425 and 475 K and the thus formed intermediate remains adsorbed on the catalyst surface. Methanol can be extracted by liquid phase extraction [13] or desorbed by steam. Nature is able to selectively convert methane into methanol based on iron or on copper systems. [71,72]. Such systems have served as inspiration for active sites in the zeolites [73]. Following the work on reduction of copper in Cu-ZSM-5 by Yamaguchi et al. [74][75][76], similarly to what was discussed in detail in section 20.3 for Cu-SSZ-13, Groothaert et al. [77] measured the structure of copper in ZSM-5 (over-exchanged, Si/Al ¼ 12) during treatment in helium and in oxygen. After ion exchange, copper(II) ions were four-coordinated with oxygen atoms without evidence of copper-copper coordination (Table 20.1). Instead, a contribution of aluminum of the framework was found. Heat treatment in helium at 773 K caused the oxygen coordination number to about half its original and a coppercopper coordination of 0.5 was observed. The Cu K edge XANES showed the characteristic pre-edge of copper(I), which is indicative of copper auto-reduction. Heating in the presence of oxygen instead of inert maintained the copper oxidation state of two and the EXAFS fitting identified an oxygen coordination of four, a copper-copper coordination of one and copper-aluminum of one. Distinction between the latter two was done on the basis of combined k 0 and k 3 weighting of the fits. In the absence of a copper-copper coordination, the Debye-Waller factor of the copper-aluminum contribution decreased to unrealistic negative values, which is indicative of "making it look like a copper scatterer."
The copper-copper coordination is indicative of formation of copper dimers or of a mixture of monomers and oligomers. Based on complementary UV-Vis data, a bis(μ-oxo) dicopper core was proposed. Earlier and later proposals have suggested the formation of a mono μ-oxo core to be more likely [73,78]. Based on theory and essentially similar EXAFS data, instead of the copper dimer, a trimer has been suggested very recently [79]. Whatever the exact nature of the oxygen-activated species, they react with methane, which, after extraction in liquid [13] or by steam [67] yields methanol.
The reaction of the oxygen-activated copper catalyst with methane has been studied by in situ quick X-ray absorption spectroscopy. Figure 20.6 shows the K-edge XANES spectra of copper-exchanged mordenite after ion exchange (1), calcination in oxygen (2), reaction with methane (3), and helium treatment at elevated temperature. The initial copper structure conforms literature and is assigned to hydrated copper(II) ions. Calcination leads to oxygenated and active copper(II) sites, indicative of the bis-respectively mono-μoxo dicopper core. Reaction of these species with methane yielded a distinct pre-edge feature at 8983.6 eV, attributed to the 1 s ! 4p transition of copper(I). Quantification by linear combination fitting yielded a mixture of copper(I), copper(II) oxide, and  During admission of steam to the methane activated sample, methanol was detected in the mass spectrometer and the concomitant formation of hydrated copper(II), some copper(II) oxide and the loss of the copper(I) were detected by XANES (Fig. 20.8). These changes in the electronic structure were paralleled by relatively minor changes in EXAFS, which identifies the absence of large structural changes and sintering. This enables performing a second cycle. The EXAFS analysis proved to be very complex and up to date no definite conclusions have been drawn from them.
Overall, oxygen activation of Cu-MOR and Cu-ZSM-5 zeolites yields small copper clusters, mostly suggested to be dimers, that contain oxygen that is reactive towards methane. The thus formed intermediate is associated to the presence of coper(I) and it can be desorbed as methanol using steam. Such step-wise process is a promising route towards direct methanol production from methane [80], even though it is currently hampered by low methanol per pass yields.

Conclusion
Cu-zeolites find commercial application in SCR and are promising catalysts for the direct methane-to-methanol conversion. X-ray absorption and emission-based techniques have played and continue to play an invaluable role in determining the Fig. 20.7 (left) Measured spectrum and deconvoluted Cu K-edge XANES spectra of Cu-MOR after high temperature oxygen activation and subsequent reaction with methane. Reproduced with permission from ref. [68], copyright American Chemical Society (2014). (right) Depiction of the 12-membered ring in mordenite with a mono μ-oxo dicopper respectively bis μ-oxo dicopper core; the copper atoms are given in gold structure of the catalytically active sites. In particular, the in situ and operando capacity in combination with element selectivity is a decisive factor in their success. In both reactions, copper undergoes a change in redox state when cycling through the reaction; in SCR NO and NH 3 and in the direct methane to methanol it is the methane that reduces copper(II) into copper(I). Despite this similarity in redox activity, the catalytically active sites have pronounced different structures, in the former reaction, single copper ions are responsible for activity, which are inactive for methane oxidation. In that case, small clusters, mostly assumed to be oxygen-bridged copper dimers and, more recently, a copper trimer, are the active species. Even though discussions about details continue, the catalytic cycle in the SCR reaction has been almost completely established. In contrast, the intermediate Reproduced with permission from ref. [68], copyright American Chemical Society (2014) (right panel) A possible dicopper core with a bridging methoxy (top) and hydroxyl group, calculated to be possible stable intermediates that is formed upon methane interaction with the oxygen activated remains unknown and major discussions about the exact active phase continue. X-raybased methods will continue to play a major role in further identification of active sites and catalytic cycles. Complementary experimental and theoretical characterization tools will be needed.
Both NH 3 -SCR and methane to methanol reactions catalyzed by Cu-zeolites are hot topics, as testified by the fact that several relevant works appeared in the literature on in the short period between manuscript submission and proof corrections. Among them we briefly review hereafter the results obtained by four of them. The relationships among the macroscopic compositional parameters of a Cuexchanged SSZ-13 zeolite catalyst, the types and numbers of Cu active sites, and activity NH 3 -SCR has been established through combined experimental and computational analysis across the catalyst composition space by Paolucci et al. [82]. Lomachenko et al. [83] used operando XAS and XES to monitor the Cu-CHA catalyst in action during NH 3 -SCR in the 150-400 C range, targeting Cu oxidation state, mobility and preferential first shell N or O ligation as a function of reaction temperature. They identified two distinct regimes for the atomic-scale behavior of Cu active-sites. Low-temperature SCR (up to ca. 200 C), characterized by balanced populations of Cu(I)/Cu(II) sites and dominated by mobile NH 3 -solvated Cuspecies and high-temperature SCR (from 250 C upwards, in correspondence to the steep increase in catalytic activity) largely dominated by framework-coordinated Cu(II) sites [83]. Narsimhan et al. [84] observed the direct, catalytic oxidation of CH 4 into CH 3 OH with over Cu-zeolites of different commercially available topologies at mild reaction conditions (210-225 C and 1 bar O 2 ). Authors observed that the catalytic rates and the apparent activation energies are affected by the zeolite topology. Cu-SSZ-13, followed by other caged-based zeolites, showed the highest rate [84]. This study supported the previous work of Wulfers et al. who observed that small-pore Cu-zeolites (Cu-SSZ-13, Cu-SSZ-16, Cu-SSZ-39, and Cu-SAPO-34) produce more methanol per copper atom than Cu-ZSM-5 and Cu-mordenite [69]. Finally, Kulkarni et al. [85] performed DFT calculations to systematically evaluate mono-copper species as active sites for the partial methane oxidation reaction in Cu-exchanged SSZ-13. Based on kinetic and thermodynamic arguments, they suggest that [Cu(II)OH] + species in the 8r ring (see Fig. 20.2b) are responsible for the experimentally observed activity. This study was able to successfully explain the available spectroscopic data and experimental observations including (a) necessity of water for methanol extraction and (b) effect of Si/Al ratio on the catalyst activity. This model differs from the dimeric and trimeric copper species inferred to be the active sites in MOR and ZSM-5 zeolites, as reviewed in Sect. 20.5.

Chapter 21
Designed Surfaces for Active Catalysts Satoshi Muratsugu, Mizuki Tada, and Yasuhiro Iwasawa

Introduction
Chemical design of artificial enzyme catalysts with high activity, selectivity, and molecular recognition has been a long-term challenge in catalytic materials research. Metal complexes with well-defined coordination structures around metal centers may resemble active sites/ensembles of metal enzymes in a sense, where organic and/or inorganic ligands coordinated to a metal center significantly promote and regulate not only reactivity of the metal site electronically but also reaction space around the metal center geometrically. The metal center may constitute a single metal atom or a multimetals cluster. As the result, high activity and sharp selectivity under mild reaction conditions can be achieved with metalcomplex catalysts, which may be difficult to obtain on metal particles and metal single crystal surfaces. However, homogeneous metal complexes in solutions tend to gather and decompose during catalytic cycles, resulting in loss of the catalytic properties. Hence, the transformation of homogeneous catalysts to a new class of heterogeneous catalysts with active structures and compositions in a molecular level has been accomplished by supporting metal complexes on oxide surfaces [1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10]. The supported metal complexes may be further transformed chemically at the surfaces to provide unique structures and compositions that are different from their homogeneous analogues and often remarkable catalytic properties. Molecularlevel characterization of catalyst surfaces thus fabricated is the key issue for evidence of the design of new catalysts, which also leads to further development of new catalytic materials [1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10]. Unfortunately, most of these supported catalysts have no long-range ordered structures and distributed at surfaces or on pore walls of porous supports, which makes molecular-level characterization of their structures and electronic states very difficult. XAFS can provide the molecular-level structural and electronic information on the active metal sites and ensembles of designed catalysts under catalytic reaction conditions [11]. However, it is to be noted that molecular-level characterization of conventional supported metal catalysts, which are generally heterogeneous and complicated, is difficult particularly under catalytic reaction conditions.
The new and distinct materials and chemistry prepared stepwise in a controllable manner by using organometallic and inorganic complexes as precursors provide an opportunity for the development of efficient catalytic molecularly organized surfaces. The key factors of chemical design of supported catalyst surfaces are composition, structure, oxidation state, and spatial distribution, which are associated with in situ XAFS characterization . Nevertheless, these issues are still a serious challenge in catalysis and materials research. In this chapter, we attempt to summarize typical examples of chemical design of active structures by supporting metal complexes on oxide surfaces and subsequent structural transformations based on in situ XAFS techniques.

In Situ XAFS Characterization of Designed Supported
Metal Catalysts

Catalytic Ethanol Oxidation on Mo Dimers on SiO 2
With supported molybdenum dimers on SiO    surfaces by using mononuclear Nb complex, dinuclear Nb complex, and Nb ethoxide as precursors, followed by chemical treatments [3,4] oxygen in a monodentate form (Nb-O: 2.01 Å), and 3.03 Å for the supported oxygen-bridging Nb-oxo dimer (Nb ¼ O: 1.79 Å) chemically bound to surface oxygen atoms in a bidentate form (Nb-O: 1.93 Å; Nb-Si: 3.28 Å; their coordination number (CN): around 2). The local structure around Nb sites is similar to that for the supported Nb monomer, where the Nb dimer catalyst promoted the bimolecular dehydration of ethanol to diethyl ether selectively (98 %), indicating an acidic character of the Nb sites. The acidic catalysis was generated by the Nb monolayer catalyst, which was prepared by using Nb(OC 2 H 5 ) 5 precursor as shown in Fig. 21.2. The obtained Nb monolayer structure on SiO 2 was characterized by XAFS, which revealed the absence of Nb ¼ O double bond and only Nb-O single bonds were observed. The Nb monolayer was attached to the SiO 2 surface in a bidentate form (Nb-O: 1.94 Å; Nb-Si: 3.27 Å; their CN: around 2). The Nb monolayer catalyst promoted the monomolecular dehydration of ethanol to ethylene selectively (>99 %). Thus, it is obvious that the XAFS technique is a powerful tool for deeper understanding not only catalyst fabrication processes but also catalysis mechanisms in the molecular level [3,11].

Metal-Coordination Assisted Hydroformylation Catalysis of a Supported Rh-dimer Catalyst
A fascinating mechanism for the ethylene (ethene) hydroformylation catalyzed by a rhodium dimer/SiO 2 catalyst, which is much more selective (88.9 % selectivity) than a conventional SiO 2 -supported Rh-particle catalyst (5.6 % selectivity) under a reduced pressure at 413 K, was suggested by the detailed EXAFS analysis as illustrated in Fig. 21.3 [16,17].  [16,17]. Hydroformylation reaction of alkenes is known to proceed on mono-metal sites like mononuclear metal complexes in homogeneous systems. However, monometal sites are generally disadvantageous because of necessity to eliminate a part of intimate ligands to form an unsaturated site on the metal atom. On the other hand, on the attached Rh dimer, it is not necessary to dissociate any ligands during the catalytic cycle, and hence the Rh dimer acts as an effective catalytic site on SiO 2 . Chemistry of the Rh dimer on the surface is different from chemistry of the homogeneous Rh monomer in a homogeneous system. The catalytic ethene hydroformylation on the Rh dimer/SiO 2 is referred to metal-coordination assisted catalysis by the two adjacent Rh atoms [6,28].

Molecular Imprinting Rh-dimer Catalysts at a SiO 2 Surface
To synthesize artificial enzymatic systems with high activity, selectivity, and molecular recognition, molecular imprinting methods that can create templateshape cavities with memory of the template molecules in organic and inorganic polymer matrices have been developed thus far [5,6,20,21,28]. Artificial enzymatic materials synthesized by molecular imprinting techniques using a variety of template molecules provide promising molecular recognition catalysis for a variety of catalytic reactions where natural enzymes cannot be employed [6,28]. Metal-complex imprinting constitutes a state of the arts currently, where ligands of the complexes are used as template molecules, which aims to create cavity near the metal site. Molecular imprinting of metal complexes enables realizing several features to note, (1) attachment of metal complex on robust supports, (2) surrounding of the metal complex by polymer matrix, and (3) production of shape selective cavity on the metal site. Metal complexes thus imprinted have been applied to molecular recognition, reactive complex stabilization, ligand exchange reaction,  [16,17] and catalysis [6,20,21,28]. Most of the imprinted metal-complex catalysts have been prepared by imprinting in a bulk polymer. However, active sites prepared by bulk imprinting may often be located inside the bulk polymer matrices, where access of substrate molecules to the sites is difficult. Further, such organic polymers tend to be not durable in organic solvents or under severe catalytic conditions such as in the presence of oxidants, at high temperatures, etc. However, oxide-supported metal complexes often exhibit unique property and remarkable reactivity so that molecular imprinting of metal complexes at oxide surfaces has many possibilities to produce new excellent catalysts similar to enzymatic systems. Tada et al. succeeded in preparing imprinted rhodium-dimer complexes at Ox.50 (SiO 2 ) surface for catalytic shape-selective hydrogenation of simple alkenes without any functional group [28]. Recognition of simple alkenes without any functional group is generally difficult.
Since a template with the same shape as the transition state of a rate-determining step is most appropriate for catalyst design, but it is hard to estimate its accurate structure. Reaction intermediates before and after the rate-determining step may be considered to have similar shapes to the early and late transition states, respectively, and those reaction intermediates can be used as templates for molecular imprinting catalysts. Tada et al. used a ligand of metal complexes as template at a SiO 2 surface for the first time, choosing a ligand of the supported metal complex with the similar shape to a reaction intermediate of alkene hydrogenation as a template molecule as shown in Fig. 21.4. P(OCH 3 ) 3 ligand has a similar shape to one of the halfhydrogenated species of 3-ethyl-2-pentene, which can produce the intermediateshape cavity by removal of the ligand. An active and selective imprinted Rh dimer catalyst was designed by the following strategy for regulation, (1) conformation of ligands coordinated to Rh atom, (2) orientation of vacant site on Rh, (3) cavity with the template molecular shape for reaction space produced behind template removal, (4) architecture of the cavity wall, and (5) micropore in inorganic polymer-matrix overlayers stabilizing the active species at the surface. In the shape-selective hydrogenation of alkenes with H 2 on the imprinted Rh dimer catalyst, the alkenes in the template cavity coordinate to a Rh atom, and the two adjacent Rh atoms cooperate to dissociate H 2 to form a hydride on each Rh atom, and then the coordinated alkene and hydride react to form a half-hydrogenated (alkyl) intermediate in the template cavity.
The preparation steps in Fig. 21.4 were characterized by EXAFS [20,21]. In order to create a Rh dimer structure with a template cavity on a SiO 2 (Ox.50) surface, a Rh 2 Cl 2 (CO) 4 and P(OCH 3 ) 3 were used as a Rh dimer precursor and a template ligand, respectively. The template P(OCH 3 ) 3 is regarded as an analogue to a half-hydrogenated alkyl intermediate of hydrogenation of 3-ethyl-2-pentene. Rh 2 Cl 2 (CO) 4 was attached on the Ox.50 surface retaining its dimer structure monitored by FT-IR. By exposing to P(OCH 3 ) 3 , the surface-attached Rh carbonyl dimer was converted to Rh monomer pair with two P(OCH 3 ) 3 ligands on Rh accompanied with Rh-Rh bond breaking (Rh-P: 2.24 Å (CN: 2.3); no Rh-Rh bond by EXAFS), which was attached on the surface via Rh-O bond at 2.03 Å in a bidentate form (Fig. 21.4). After the P(OCH 3 ) 3 coordination the supported Rh template complexes were covered by SiO 2 matrix overlayers by a hydrolysispolymerization of Si(OCH 3 ) 4 . Then, a template was removed by evacuation at 363 K to produce the imprinted Rh dimer catalyst. By the imprinting procedure, Rh 3d XPS intensity reduced remarkably, indicating that the Rh species were embedded in the polymerized silica matrix overlayers that were characterized by 29 Si solid-state MAS NMR.
The structures around Rh atoms in the imprinted Rh dimer catalyst were also investigated by EXAFS. Note that the surface imprinting caused redimerization of the Rh-monomer pair to produce the imprinted Rh template dimer with a direct Rh-Rh bond at 2.68 Å (CN: 1.3) at the surface. The removal of the template ligand left the template cavity on a Rh atom in the pore of 7.4 Å dimension in the SiO 2matrix overlayers to form the imprinted Rh dimer catalyst with a Rh-Rh bond at 2.70 Å (CN: 1.2), Rh-P bonds at 2.21 Å (CN: 1.1), and Rh-O (surface) bonds at 2.12 Å (CN: 2.2). The EXAFS analysis indicated the removal of a phosphite ligand per Rh by the molecular imprinting procedure, where the CN of the Rh-P bond reduced from 2.3 to 1.1. This change in the Rh structures in the imprinting processes was also explained by DFT calculation [20,21]. It is to be noted that during the transformation of the imprinted supported Rh template complex to the  [20,21] imprinted Rh dimer catalyst there was a stable structure of Rh 2 (P(OCH 3 ) 3 ) 3 with one phosphite ligand on a Rh atom and with two phosphite ligands on another Rh atom as shown in Fig. 21 When the Ir 2 /Al 2 O 3 was exposed to isopropanol, the quantitative amount of acetone was produced, leaving the Ir 2 hydride species (Ir 2 -H 2 /Al 2 O 3 ). When the obtained Ir 2 -H 2 /Al 2 O 3 was reacted with an excess of acetophenone in toluene in the absence of i-PrOH at 343 K, the 0.9 equivalent amount of 1-phenylethanol to the Ir 2 -H 2 quantity was produced in the solution by GC, suggesting that the Ir 2 -H 2 structure contributes to the hydrogen transfer as an intermediate for the hydrogen transfer catalysis. Ir L III -edge EXAFS for the Ir 2 -H 2 /Al 2 O 3 revealed an Ir 2 dimeric structure involving an Ir-Ir bond at 2.67 Å (CN ¼ 0.9 AE 0.1). It is to be noted that the CN(Ir--Al) dropped from 1.9 (AE0. While the catalytic transfer hydrogenation from isopropanol to acetophenone at 343 K slowly proceeded on the homogeneous Ir-dimer precursor (Ir 2 ), the Ir 2 /Al 2 O 3 catalyst promoted the catalytic transfer hydrogenation much more than the homogeneous catalyst. It was proposed that the interfacial bond rearrangement in  [31] the Ir 2 /Al 2 O 3 assisted the formation of Ir 2 -H 2 /Al 2 O 3 , where the catalytic hydrogen transfer reaction may proceed in conjunction with the dynamic structure transformation with the 90 rotation of the Ir-Ir bond direction.

Single-Site Zeolite-Supported Ir Carbonyl Complexes
A family of HY zeolite-supported cationic organoiridium carbonyl complexes was formed by reaction of Ir-(CO) 2 (acac) to form supported Ir(CO) 2 complexes, which were treated at 298 K and 1 atm with flowing gas-phase reactants, including C 2 H 4 , H 2 , CO, and D 2 O. Mass spectrometry was used to identify effluent gases, and FT-IR and XAFS were used to characterize the supported species, with the results bolstered by DFT calculations [32]. The supported species include Ir(CO) 2 , Ir(CO) (C 2 H 4 ) 2 , Ir(CO)(C 2 H 4 ), Ir(CO)(C 2 H 5 ), etc. EXAFS spectra at Ir L III-edge demonstrated that each Ir atom was bonded, on average, to two support oxygen atoms; thus, the support acted as a bidentate ligand. When the zeolite-supported Ir dicarbonyl was exposed to flowing ethylene at 298 K, changes in the EXAFS spectra were observed. The EXAFS data show that the Ir-C CO and Ir-O CO coordination numbers decreased from nearly 2 to nearly 1, indicating the removal of one of the two initially present CO ligands of the Ir complex. At the same time, the coordination number of the EXAFS contribution characterizing the sum of Ir-O zeolite + Ir-C ethylene contributions increased from nearly 2 to nearly 4.5. These data indicate replacement of carbonyl ligands by ethylene, and the noninteger value of the combined Ir-O zeolite + Ir-C ethylene contribution indicates a mixture of species, consistent with the IR spectra pointing to both Ir(CO)(C 2 H 4 ) and Ir(CO)(C 2 H 4 ) 2 species [32].

Single-Site d 0 -Zr Heterogeneous Arene Hydrogenation Catalysts
Structural characterization of the active sites on solid catalyst surfaces is frequently tenuous because their fraction among all sites typically is quite low. This problem has been overcome by supporting appropriate metal complexes on suitable support surfaces followed by chemical treatments in a controlled manner [1-10, 13-18, 20, 21, 27-29, 31, 32]. It was found that the surface Zr complexes produced by supporting Cp*Zr(CH 3 ) 3 on Brønsted super acidic sulfated alumina (AlS) are exceptionally active for benzene hydrogenation, with $ 100 % of the Zr sites catalytically significant as determined by kinetic poisoning experiments [33].
Zr K-edge XAFS data for neat Cp 2 Zr(H) 2 and Cp*Zr(CH 3 ) 3 /AIS were measured under strictly anhydrous/anaerobic conditions, but attempts to fit the Cp*Zr(CH 3 ) 3 /AlS EXAFS spectrum with models involving four scattering shells, Zr-C(Cp*), Zr-CH 3 (Cp*), Zr-CH 3 , and Zr-O, were complicated by the overlap of the scatterers arising from the insignificant differences in both bond distances and phase shift and amplitude functions. Hence, the EXAFS spectra were analyzed by fitting the difference spectra of the Zr complexes before and after the immobilization on AlS, after exposure to benzene, and after benzene hydrogenation, thus extracting the structural changes while eliminating invariant contributions [33]. In this way, the Cp 2 Zr(H)  [33] falls within the 2.39-2.58 Å Zr-C(Cp) bond distance range. Curve-fitting of the difference EXAFS spectrum of Cp 2 Zr(CH 3 ) 2 /AlS (Fig. 21.6b) revealed that the CN of Zr-O bonds in the supported catalyst Cp 2 Zr(CH 3 ) 2 /AlS was 2.1 at an average Zr-O distance of 2.37 Å, significantly longer than in typical covalent Zr-O bonds,. There are no direct Zr-Zr bonds, which may exclude a dimeric species. These results are in good agreement with the aforementioned DFT models of Cp 2 Zr (CH 3 ) 2 /AlS (Fig. 6b).
XAFS monitored catalytic reaction species for Cp*Zr(CH 3 ) 3 /AlS exposed to benzene, then to H 2 298 K. Fitting of the Cp*Zr(CH 3 ) 3 /AlS/benzene difference EXAFS spectrum revealed $ 3.0 additional carbon neighbors around each Zr center at 2.35 Å (Fig. 21.6c). In principle, this coordination might correspond to (1) $ 50 % of the organozirconium centers are coordinated to benzene in an η 6 -coordination fashion or (2) $ 100 % of the active sites are coordinated to benzene in an η 3 mode. Although η 3 coordination is relatively uncommon for π-complexed arenes, the present results are consistent with the solid-state NMR results and DFT calculations, considering the overlap of four scattering shells (Fig. 21.6c). Following the benzene hydrogenation, curve-fitting of the (Cp*Zr(CH 3 ) 3 /AlS/benzene + H 2 )-Cp*Zr(CH 3 ) 3 /AlS/benzene) EXAFS difference spectrum revealed that about 50 % of the Zr sites retain a coordinated benzene molecule (CN ¼ 1.6; Zr-C(benzene) ¼ 2.36 Å), in good agreement with the aforementioned 13 C-CP MAS NMR results and kinetic data showing that benzene irreversibly adsorbed on Cp*Zr(CH 3 ) 3 /AIS, that the established rate law is zero-order to benzene, and that the first H 2 addition is rate-limiting [33]. The long Zr + Á Á Á OAlSÀ distances indicate loose ion pairing, which finds surprisingly close analogy to homogeneous ion-paired early-transition metal polymerization catalysts, where the nature of the ion pairing strongly modulates the barrier to olefin activation and enchainment. The initial activation of the incoming olefinic molecules by the electrophilic metal center requires geometrical loosening of the ion pairing. It also suggests the intriguing possibility that such electron-deficient surfaces may be the long-sought, ultimate "weakly coordinating" anions [33].

Ethylene Polymerization on Isolated Chromium(III) Silicates
Mononuclear Cr(III) surface sites were synthesized from supporting [Cr(OSi (OtBu) 3 ) 3 (tetrahydrofurano) 2 ] on silica partially dehydroxylated at 973 K, followed by a thermal treatment under vacuum, and characterized by XAFS together with FT-IR, UV-vis, ESR, and DFT. The grafted sites were highly active for ethylene polymerization to yield polyethylene with a broad molecular weight distribution, similar to that typically obtained from the Phillips catalyst. XANES spectra for grafted species 1, 2, and 3 in

Prospect
Attaching metal complexes on oxide surfaces provides a new class of catalytic systems with advantages of both heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysts. The catalytic properties of surface site-isolated metal monomers, dimers, clusters, and even monolayers are different from those of metals and metal oxides, and also metal complexes in solution. Combination of the metal-complex attaching with structural transformations, molecular imprinting, etc. on oxide surfaces can design advanced catalytic materials. In situ XAFS characterizations including timeresolved XAFS [22,23,26,30,[35][36][37][38][39][40] and spatially resolved XAFS [41][42][43][44][45][46] provide excellent opportunities for fundamental understanding of the origin and mechanism of the tremendous catalysis by the designed surfaces and for more precisely controlled synthesis of catalyst surfaces, which are needed for the higher class of research.  [3] • In situ structural analysis of Pt 3 Mo/C catalyst for methanol oxidation [4] • Local structures of PtRu electrocatalysts and alloy formation [5] • In situ XAFS analysis of Pt-M (M ¼ Co, Cr, Ni, and Fe) bimetallic electrocatalysts in HClO 4 solution at different potentials [6] • In situ XAFS for methanol electrooxidation process on Pt/C and PtRu/C electrocatalysts at different potentials [7] • Atomic XAFS analysis for OH and CO coverage estimation on PtRu electrocatalysts in PEFC [8] • Methanol electrooxidation on Pt/C mixed with organic complexes [9] • XANES and EXAFS analyses for Pt-Ru nanoparticle formation process [10] • In situ XAFS of phase-segregated nanostructured PtRu anode catalysts for DMFC [11] • In situ time-resolved XAFS of Pt/C cathode catalysts for PEFC voltage operations [12] • In situ XAFS analysis of Pt, Ru, and Pt-Ru/C electrocatalysts under various atmospheres [13] • CO poisoning kinetics on PtRu electrocatalysts by operando XAFS [14] • Activity-structure relationship on PtCo/C catalyst for oxygen reduction process [15] • Structural difference on commercial and prepared PtRu electrocatalysts for DMFC [16] • SK-edge XAFS for SOFC anodes [17] • Structural changes in Pt cathode electrocatalyst for temperature and potential variations [18] • Application of low Pt content PEFC catalysts [19] • Co electronic structure in Pt 3 Co/C cathode catalyst by Co 2p XAFS [20] • Atomic AXAFS and Delta mu XANES for electrocatalysts [21] • Operando XAFS for structural changes in ethanol oxidation reaction on Pt/C, PtRu/C, and PtSn/C anode electrocatalysts [22] • Understanding of catalysts activity and stability for PtVFe/C cathode electrocatalysts in PEFC [23] • Core-shell structure of IrNi/C anode catalyst [24] • In situ XAFS cell design for oxygen reduction electrocatalysis with high oxygen flux [25] • In situ electrochemical EXAFS for Pt-dendrimer-encapsulated nanoparticles [26] • In situ anode and cathode investigation at different positions in PEFC XAFS cell [27] • Nanostructure of Pt monolayer model catalysts by in situ fluorescent XAFS [28] • Local structure and chemical disorder by potential cycling processes in PEFC [29] • Local structures of Pt À Pd/C bimetallic fuel cell catalysts in acid media [30] • Structure of Fe-Pt-Ru nanocrystals for methanol oxidation reaction [31] • Time-resolved XAFS analysis for surface events on Pt 3 Co/C cathode catalyst under voltage cycling processes [32] • Structural strain of dealloyed bimetallic PtCo 3 and PtCu 3 catalysts for PEFC [33] • High-energy-resolution fluorescence-detected XAFS for size-selected Pt nanoparticles for electro-oxidation [34] • 3D visualization of MEA before and after the degradation by X-ray Laminography-XAFS [35] • Structural kinetics of Pt/C cathode catalysts with practical catalyst loading in MEA [36] • Surface transformation of Au-Pt/C and Pd-Pt/C electrocatalysts at different potentials [37] • Mechanism of methanol electrooxidation on PtRu anode electrocatalysts [38] • Electronic properties and CO and CO 2 tolerance behavior on Pt-bimetallic catalysts [39] • Operando XAFS for mechanism observation of Pt oxide growth on PEFC electrocatalysts [40] • In situ characterization of Pt electrocatalysts on different carbon supports using rotating disc electrodes (RDE) and membrane electrode assembly (MEA) [41] • Characterization of carbon incorporating FeNx electrocatalysts [42] • Characterization of PtAu core-shell electrocatalysts [43] • In situ time-resolved XAFS analysis of transient states of Pt/C electrocatalysts for loading processes [44] • Rate enhancement and structural kinetics of Pt-M (Co and Ni) cathode electrocatalysts for voltage cycling processes [45] • Characterization of PtNi nanoparticle catalyst on carbon nanotubes for methanol oxidation [46] • Structural differences on durable PtCo x electrocatalysts for voltage cycling stages [47] • Operando XAFS analysis of Ni, NiZn, and Co hydrazine electrooxidation catalysts for anion exchange membrane fuel cells [48] • Key factors affecting the performance and durability of cathode electrocatalysts in PEFC [49] • Mapping Pt species in PEFC MEA [50] • Imagings of Pt chemical species in Pt/C cathode catalyst layers of PEFC [51] • Effects of gas exchange cycles on deterioration of Pt/C cathode catalysts in PEFCs [52

Time-Resolved XAFS Applications to PEFCs
In situ/operando time-resolved XAFS spectra of Pt/C, Pt 3 Co/C, and Pt 3 Ni/C cathode electrocatalysts in PEFC MEAs were measured every 100 ms for voltage cycling processes between 0.4 and 1.0 V or 1.4 V vs. RHE, while measuring electrochemical evens (current and charge) at the same time [36,45,49]. The NEA sizes were 3.0 Â 3.0 cm 2 , and the catalyst loadings were 0.5 mg metal/Pd cm À2 . The MEA was sandwiched into an in-situ XAFS cell with Teflon gaskets at both cathode and anode sides. Flows of H 2 to the anode and N 2 or air to the cathode were regulated using mass-flow controllers. The gases were bubbled through humidifiers at 351 K and the humidified gases were supplied to the in-situ XAFS cell at 353 K. The cell voltage between the anode and the cathode was controlled using a P/G stat (VSP, BioLogic Science Instruments Co.) with a current amplifier (VMP 3B-20, BioLogic Science Instruments). View of the SPring-8 BL36XU experimental hutch for in situ time-resolved and 2D/3D imaging XAFS measurements is shown in Fig. 22.1a. Setup of in situ time-resolved XAFS experiments is also shown in Fig. 22.1b. Systematic analysis of in situ/operando time-resolved XAFS spectra for Pt/C, Pt 3 Co/C, and Pt 3 Ni/C cathode catalysts in the transient response processes of the potential jump from 0.4 to 1.0 V or 1.4 V and from 1.0 V or 1.4 to 0.4 V can provide the structural kinetics of the cathode catalysts, where six elementary reaction steps involving Pt valence change, Pt À O bond formation and breaking, and Pt À Pt bond breaking and reformation can be observed and their rate constants can be decided. It is, in general, difficult to observe elementary reaction steps and mechanisms in the steady state conditions. In the transient response processes the reaction sequences and hence mechanism for the dynamic cathode catalysis can be grasped by in situ time-resolved XAFS. The typical results on the MEA Pt/C catalysis in the voltage cycling processes between 0.4 V and 1.4 V are summarized in Fig. 22.2 [36,49].
The changes in the white line peak intensities of in situ time-resolved QXANES spectra for the voltage cycling processes were significantly different in both variation range and absolute value between the Pt/C, Pt 3 Co/C, and Pt 3 Ni/C. The :  Combined techniques of XAFS with other physical techniques, such as timeresolved XRD, in situ HAXPES (hard x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy), x-ray computed Laminography, x-ray CT (computed tomography), STEM-EDS, etc., may also provide excellent opportunities for deeper and unprecedented understanding of key issues and mechanisms for the performance and degradation of fuel cell electrocatalyst layers. In this section, the application of the same-view nano XAFS/ STEM-EDS technique to polymer electrolyte fuel cells is briefly summarized. Spatially nonuniform degradation of Pt/C cathode catalysts in PEFC was successfully imaged by a combination of nano XAFS and STEM-EDS techniques in the same-view mode under humid N 2 ambient equivalent to in situ MEA conditions [51,58].
Pt L III -edge nano XAFS spectra were measured at Spring-8 BL36XU by using a Si (111) double crystal monochromator. X-ray beam at 11.39-12.17 keV was focused on 335 Â 338 nm and 228 x 225 nm via a pair of elliptically bent KB mirrors. Nano XAFS spectra were measured in a fluorescence mode, inclining the sample to the X-ray nano-beam by 30 . In the scanning nano XAFS method, a XAFS spectrum was obtained from 206 maps in total corresponding to 206 energy points. To avoid sample damage with synchrotron X-ray irradiation, the beam stay time at each pixel in the XAFS imaging was shortened to only 6-12 μs. For the same-view nano-XAFS/STEM-EDS observations sliced MEA pieces with 100 nm thickness were used. The 100 nm thick sample was put on a SiN membrane (100 nm thick) with 0.5 Â 0.5 mm window and with 100 μm thick Si flame. For the position calibration of nano-XAFS map and STEM image we used the orthogonal distance regression for the estimation of fitting parameters p 0 , p 1 , and p 2 to give a minimum residual; A(x, y)-p 0 * B(x-p 1 ,y-p 2 ) (A(x, y): absorbance of nano-XAFS map and B (x, y): contrast of the STEM image for coordinate point (x, y)). Thus, the positions were calibrated by using the calculated p 1 and p 2 [51].
Figure 22.4A exhibits the nano-XAFS μ(11.600 keV) mapping, which corresponds to a map of the Pt quantity, for the Pt/C cathode catalyst layer in the degraded PEFC MEA (membrane-electrode assembly) after the anode-gas exchange cycles. After the nano-XAFS measurements, TEM/STEM-EDS in the same region was imaged by using the same-view cell. The same-view nano-XAFS/ STEM-EDS imaging for the degraded MEA evidenced the presence of two sorts of Nafion ionomer-filled nano-holes (red squares 1 and 2) and the normal area 3 without holes in the cathode layer as shown in Fig. 22.4A. The Pt amounts (Pt L III -edge jump) in the carbon-corrosion nano-hole areas 1 and 2 were estimated to be 22 % and 18 %, respectively, of that in the area 3 without carbon corrosion. The Pt oxidation states in the areas 1-3 were estimated from a linear relationship between the Pt valence and the white line peak area of the normalized XANES spectra [37,41]. The Pt oxidation state in the nano-hole area 1 was estimated as þ1.9 (AE0.15) from Fig. 22.4B, which indicates that the majority of Pt species in the nano-hole area 1 is situated in a Pt 2þ state, leaching from the carbon support. In the nano-hole area 1, neither nano size nor subnano size particles were observed (Fig. 22 Pt-Pt bonds, indicating monomeric Pt 2þ ions. In contrast, Pt nanoparticles detached from the carbon support by carbon corrosion were distributed in the nano-hole area 2 (Fig. 22.4c,d) and their Pt valence was estimated to be zero (Fig. 22.4B). The metallic Pt nanoparticles in the area 2 were also confirmed by the nano-EXAFS analysis, which exhibited only Pt-Pt bonds with the coordination number of 11.7 (AE1.7) at 0.277 nm (AE0.001 nm) and no Pt-O bonds were observed [51]. The EDS line profiles in the nano-hole area 2 showed much lower F content (F element originates from the Nafion ionomers) than that in the nano-hole area 1, while the Pt contents in both nano-hole areas were similar to each other. The Pt/ionomer ratios (wt/wt) were estimated as 0.02 and 0.12 for the areas 1 and 2, respectively, whereas that in the normal catalyst area 3 was calculated as 1.07 (similar to the original value) by the EDS. Thus, it is to be noted that the Pt/ionomer ratio caused the different types of degradation of the Pt/C catalysts in the MEA cathode layer; leaching as Pt 2þ ions and detaching as metallic Pt nanoparticles from the carbon support upon carbon corrosion. The normalized nano-XANES spectra in Fig. 22.4B showed an isosbestic point at 11.570 keV among them, which indicates the direct transformation of Pt 0 -Pt 2þ species during the AGEX treatments [51].  A-D). E: Pt/Ionomer ratio map for the degraded MEA after the ADT cycles [58] before the ADT cycles there were no significant cracks/voids (a-d), whereas in the degraded MEA after the ADT 5000 cycles many nano-cracks/voids were formed due to carbon corrosion (A-E). The nano-crack/void areas were calculated as 11.9 % of the flat cathode layer area. The Pt valence of the Pt/C cathode layer in the aging MEA was zero (metallic) as shown in Fig. 22.5d, whereas the calculated Pt valence map for the Pt/C cathode layer in the degraded MEA in Fig. 22.5D revealed the localized distribution of Pt oxidized species in the nano-micro cracks/ voids as well as the cathode catalyst boundary region (about 3 μm) close to the electrolyte layer.
Figure 22.6 shows the variation of the Pt/ionomer ratio with the nano-crack.void size and the number of each crack/void size, and the effect of Pt/Ionomer ratio on the Pt valence in the degraded MEA. The mean crack/void size and average Pt/ionomer ratio were 154 (AE130) nm and 0.14, respectively. The smaller nanocrack/void sizes than 200 nm were predominant in the degraded MEA after the ADT 5000 cycles, and the Pt species of ~98 % among the Pt species observed in the nano-cracks/voids existed in the nano-cracks smaller than 500 nm. The Pt valences of Pt nanoparticles in the nano-cracks/voids larger than 250 nm were 1.3-1.8þ. Pt/Ionomer ratios became lower with increasing crack sizes. The tendency of easier Pt oxidation in the larger nano-cracks/voids may be caused by an increase of electric resistance and/or heterogeneous over-loaded potentials around the nanom Fig. 22. 6 The effect of the Pt/Ionomer ratio on the Pt valence and the variation of the nano-hole number and size with the Pt/ionomer ratio in a degraded MEA [58] cracks. The ionomer content also plays a role in the decision of Pt oxidation states for the Pt nanoparticles detached and dissoluted from the carbon support. The number ratio of 80 % and area ratio of 35 % in the nano-cracks/voids contained Pt and ionomers at the Pt/ionomer ratios of 0.09-0.24. The nano-cracks/voids with the lower Pt/ionomer ratios than 0.05 included oxidized Pt species whose valences were 1.3-1.8þ. On the other hand, Pt valences in the nano-cracks/voids with the Pt/ionomer ratios higher than 0.05 were calculated almost zero (metallic). These results suggest that the high content of ionomers in the nano-cracks/voids facilitates the oxidative dissolution of Pt and stabilizes the oxidized Pt species via the coordination of Nafion-SO 3 to the cationic Pt species, whereas the low content of ionomers in the nano-cracks/voids promotes the detachment of metallic Pt nanoparticles/clusters from the carbon support [58]. The same-view nano-XAFS/ STEM-EDS imaging allowed finding the unprecedented aspect of the formations of the leached Pt 2þ oxidation species and detached metallic Pt nanoparticles in the Nafion ionomer-filled nano-hole areas of the degraded Pt/C cathode layers.

Prospect
In situ, time-resolved and spatially resolved (imaging) XAFS techniques may provide key issues and mechanisms affecting the performance and durability of cathode electrocatalysts in fuel cells, which cannot be addressed definitely and directly by other techniques. The advanced XAFS techniques are promising tools to present real-time structural kinetics/dynamics of potential-dependent surface reactions on cathode electrocatalysts and spatial mapping of time-dependent chemical changes of Pt nanoparticles under various electrochemical conditions in a nondestructive manner. The XAFS techniques can be consorted with other new techniques such as in-situ 3D X-ray Laminography, 3D XCT, ambient-pressure HAXPES, etc. (see Chapters 1, Chapter 10, Chapter 11, and Chapter 12) [35,59].

Chapter 23
Secondary Batteries Toshiaki Ohta

Introduction
The advent of Li ion batteries (LIBs) changed the world of secondary batteries. With their excellent performance, the LIBs are widely used as electric energy storages for mobile phones, laptop computer, etc. New types of LIBs have been developed one after another and now it is a worldwide challenge to develop a largescale battery with high capacity for hybrid and/or full electric vehicles [1]. Battery is, in principle, composed of cathode, separator, anode, and electrolyte, as shown in Fig. 23.1. It has two phases, charge and discharge, in which Li ions move from cathode to anode, and vice versa, respectively. It has several important key factors: high capacity, high cyclability, high charging rate, low cost, ease of preparation, and safety. To realize a battery with such high performances, a number of difficult subjects should be overcome. Since the battery is a very complicated target, many analytical techniques have been applied to elucidate the structures, electrochemical reactions of batteries, such as XRD (X-ray diffraction), neutron diffraction, Raman scattering, NMR, etc., as well as theoretical simulations. Especially, X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (XAFS) is a powerful tool and numerous studies with XAFS have been reported for secondary batteries. Due to the limit of page, however, this review is focused on the XAFS methodologies and how they are applied for characterization of the secondary batteries.
T. Ohta (*) Synchrotron Radiation Center, Ritsumeikan University, Kusatsu, Shiga 525-8577, Japan e-mail: ohta@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp

Experimental Methodology
Since hard X-rays are highly penetrative, one can easily perform in situ XAFS experiments in the hard X-ray region during charge and discharge with the transmission mode. The oxidation states and the local structures of transition metals, such as Mn, Co, Ni, are revealed by the conventional XAFS technique, by using an aluminum-coated laminate pack or a home-made electrochemical cell. This in situ XAFS method has been actively used for the analysis of a variety of new electrodes [2][3][4].
Combining a highly brilliant X-ray beam with a 2D detector, one can get the depth-profile information. Figure 23.2 shows an experimental setup for the depthresolved XAFS for a cathode/electrolyte interface [5]. When the X-rays irradiate a sample, fluorescent X-rays emitted in the normal direction from the sample surface come from both surface and bulk, while those emitted in the grazing direction come predominantly from surface. Thus, with a proper setup of a 2D detector relative to the sample surface (see Fig. 23.2), the depth-resolved XAFS can be performed.
The reflective index of the X-ray is slightly less than unity. Thus, if a highly collimated X-ray beam is incident to a flat surface at an angle less than the critical angle, it is totally reflected with a very shallow penetration in the sample. Since the penetration depth is as small as a few nanometers, one can probe only the surface information of the electrode under the condition. This total reflection XAFS has Combining a broad X-ray beam with a 2D detector, in situ 2D imaging XAFS can be realized for the battery analysis [8,9]. With this technique, one can obtain the spatial distribution of a specific element, and also that of a specific oxidation state. Delithiation/lithiation upon charge/discharge causes the charge compensation of the elements contained in electrodes. Imaging XAFS is a useful technique to monitor how the charge/discharge proceeds.
Electrochemical reaction dynamics is one of the important issues of batteries. Quick scanning XAFS spectroscopy has been applied to study high rate delithiation behavior of an electrode [10,11]. However, the ion diffusion upon charge/discharge proceeds sometimes inhomogeneously. It is desirable to get the fast time evolution of imaging XAFS for such cases. Recently, Katayama et al. developed a new type of dispersive XAFS by using the vertical dispersion of synchrotron white light, instead of conventional horizontal dispersion, as shown in Fig. 23.3. This vertically dispersive XAFS provides a time-resolved spatial distribution of the electrode reaction [12].
Charge and discharge processes sometimes cause structural change, phase transformation, or cation mixing in the Li and 3d transition metal layers. Combined use of XAFS and XRD is effective to study such a complicated case. However, in general, XRD and XAFS experiments are performed independently at different beamlines. Recently, Tokuda et al. constructed a beamline in SPring-8 which enables us to perform XRD and XAFS simultaneously, as shown in Fig. 23.4 [13]. Thanks to the high beam stability, the irradiated area in the sample stays Fig. 23.2 Experimental setup for the depth-resolved XAFS for a cathode/electrolyte interface. For Li deintercalation, the cathode was dipped in the electrolyte. Then the wet cathode was pulled up for the XAFS experiment [5] within 1 μm upon energy scanning with a channel-cut Si (111) monochromator. The same experimental setup can be used for the experiment of the diffraction anomalous fine structure (DAFS) method. DAFS is known to be a spectroscopic analysis method coupling XAFS and XRD [14] and enables us to determine the valence state and local structure of a selected element at a specific crystalline site and/or phase. So far, it had been applied exclusively for a single crystal, not for a practical material. Recently, this DAFS was revisited as a powerful method by using a logarithmic dispersion relation, applicable to a practical polycrystalline material [15]. The improved DAFS will be an especially powerful technique for the structure analysis of a complicated system, such as a multielement intermixing composite battery [16].  On the other hand, XAFS experiments in the soft X-ray region are not straightforward. Penetration depth is shallow and, in general, the transmission mode is not available. Instead, one adopts the fluorescent yield (FY) by using a silicon drift detector (SDD) and the electron yield modes to obtain XAFS spectra. For the electron yield mode, one usually uses two types of modes: partial electron yield (PEY) mode by using a microchannel plate (MCP) electron multiplier covered with a retarding grid and total electron yield (TEY) by monitoring the sample leak current, in which the former is more surface sensitive since it rejects low energy secondary electrons. It is desirable to make use of these three modes simultaneously, which provides depth profiles of XAFS. In the soft X-ray region, there are Li, O, F, S, Si, P K-edges, which are important elements contained in electrodes, electrolytes, and additives. There are also 3d transition metal L-edges. Since these L-edge XAFS spectra are associated with 2p ! 3d transitions, they are rather complicated due to 3d spin multiplicity, but they provide information about spin state as well as valency [17]. Combined use of K-and L-edge XAFS is useful for full understanding of 3d transition metals in batteries [18,19].
Due to the low penetration depth soft X-rays, in situ XAFS is challenging. We have to develop a special cell for the operando analysis of XAFS. Here, the key factor is to find a thin and vacuum-tight X-ray window. A typical electrochemical cell is shown in Fig. 23.5, which has worked successfully for the operando P and S K-XAFS experiments in the SR center, Ritsumeikan University [20].

Typical Applications of XAFS to Batteries

Depth-Resolved XAFS
Takamatsu et al. studied local structures of a LiCoO 2 thin film at the solid electrode/ electrolyte solution interface by the depth-resolved XAFS, described in the previous section [5]. They designed a unique He gas filled spectro-electrochemical cell, During the charge process, the cathode was immersed in the electrolyte solution with Li metal as a counter electrode, and a constant voltage was applied by a potentiostat to charge the electrode. For each XAFS experiment, the cathode was pulled up from the electrolyte and was irradiated by the grazing incident SR beam coming through a kapton window. Fluorescent X-rays were detected by a 2D pixel array detector, PILATUS 100 K, located 0.45 m apart from the sample. XAFS spectra were taken before charge (3.2 V versus Li/Liþ), charged to 4.2 V, and overcharged to 4.4 V. Figure 23.6a, b show Co K-edge depthresolved XAFS spectra of the LiCoO 2 film before charge and their Fourier transformations, respectively. From the bulk to the interface, the edge shifts toward lower energy, indicating the surface Co was reduced by soaking. In the Fourier spectra, the first peak at 1.5 A is associated with the Co-O bond. Its peak height decreases from bulk to interface, keeping the bond distance same, indicating that the DW (Debye-Waller) factor of the surface Co-O bond was more enhanced than the bulk ones. When overcharged to 4.4 V, the Co-O distance decreases only in the bulk and the DW factor increases considerably, suggesting that a tremendous distortion occurs by overcharge. This distortion might be the main cause of deterioration of the electrode. These results show that the depth-resolved in situ XAFS experiments provide useful information about the structural change at the solid electrode/ electrolyte interface in the nanoscale spatial resolution.

XAFS in the Soft X-ray Region with Three Detection Modes
As described in the previous section, simultaneous use of PEY, TEY, and PFY modes in the soft X-ray region can probe both surface and bulk structures of batteries. Since deterioration of an electrode usually starts from the surface, XAFS experiment with these three modes provides useful information. Yogi et al. studied the effect of adding lithium bis(oxalate) borate (LiBOB) to the electrolyte on the cyclability of the LiCoO 2 electrode [21]. Figure 23.7 shows O K-XANES spectra of LiCoO 2 just after soaked and after 20 cycles of charge/ discharge with three detection modes. Just after soaked, the surface is covered with Li 2 CO 3 , though the bulk is predominantly LiCoO 2 . After 20 cycles, the surface structure does not change in the case with LiBOB, while it changes drastically without LiBOB. From the spectral similarity, we can deduce that the LiCoO 2 in the surface region decomposed to CoO. Recently, a series of Li-rich Mn-layered oxides, yLi 2 MnO 3 ・(1-y)LiMO 2 (M ¼ Ni, Co, Mn) have been paid special attention as high capacity positive electrodes in the next-generation Li ion batteries [22]. Since such a high capacity cannot be explained only by the redox reaction of transition metals, oxygen must commit the charge compensation to some extent. Oishi et al. studied O K-edge XANES as well as Ni, Co, and Mn L-edge XANES for the Li 1.16 Ni 0.15 Co 0.19 Mn 0.50 O 2 electrode, focusing on the reversible cycles after the initial high irreversible process [23]. Figure 23.8a shows O K-edge XANES spectra after first and second fully charged (4.8 V) and discharged (2.0 V) states. The spectra consists of a preedge structure (527-534 eV) and a broad structure above 534 eV. The former is associated with the transitions from O 1 s to hybridized states of O2p and metal 3d, while the latter with those from O 1 s to metal 4 s,p and O 2p hybridized states. Upon discharge, double bands at 536 and 540 eV appear. This is a typical feature of the octahedrally-coordinated metal oxides. The peak shift of the main band toward lower energy reflects the metal-O bond lengthening by Li intercalation. Upon charge, the preedge peak is enhanced in both the first and second cycles.
Figure 23.8b shows the difference spectra between the charged and discharged states in the preedge region for first and second cycles. Peak A1 is due to the formation of the hole state at the charged state [24], while a newly appeared peak A2 might be associated with peroxide species, whose peak energy coincides with that of Li 2 O 2 [25]. Although the presence of the peroxide species was proposed by XPS and ESR [26], the present experiment is the first direct observation of the peroxide species by O K-XAFS.

Combined Use of XAFS and XRD
XRD is a method for structural analysis, while XAFS provides information of valence and local structure around X-ray absorbing atoms. Thus, the combined use of XRD and XAFS is a powerful technique to study the atomic and electronic structures of the electrode, especially their changes during charge/discharge. Lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO 4 ) is an olivine-structured material and is known to be a promising cathode because of its high thermal and chemical stabilities, high charging rate, and low cost. Many research works have been focused on the elucidation of high rate performance, but its electronic and structural changes are very unique. Charge and discharge reactions proceed in a two phase manner between LiFePO 4 (LFP) and FePO 4 (FP) [9]. Leriche et al. [27] and Wang et al. [28] investigated the structural However, these experiments are, in general, performed separately. To get full understanding of the changes for such a complicated electrode, simultaneous experiment of XRD and XAFS is desirable. By use of the beamline, described in the experimental section, Tokuda et al. studied the details of the correlation between the valence and structure upon charge [13].
With a rate of 1C, a XRD profile was taken at 7100 eV, just below the Fe K-edge, and Fe K-XANES spectrum was taken subsequently at each step. In situ XRD profiles and Fe K-XANES spectra are shown in Fig. 23.9a, b, respectively. Volume fractions of Fe(II) and Fe(III) were obtained from the XANES spectral analysis. Those of LFP and FP were also obtained from the LFP (020,211) and FP(211) and (020) in the XRD pattern, respectively. These volume fractions are plotted as a function of time, as shown in Fig. 23.9c. Interestingly, there is some discrepancy between valence and structural changes, suggesting that the phase separation of LFP to FP is suppressed at the beginning of delithiation, while it is accelerated at the latter stage. This detailed information can be obtained since XRD and XAFS measurements are carried out at the same time in the same area of the sample.

Imaging XAFS
Imaging is a very impressive and effective technique and has been adopted in various methods, such as X-ray fluorescence analysis, photoelectron spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, etc. In particular, imaging XAFS is a unique technique for the spatial analysis of a different oxidation state of transition metal species. Katayama et al. applied this technique to trace how charge/discharge of the LFP electrode proceeds [29]. With delithiation, LFP turns to FP, as described in the previous section. Fe(II) and Fe(III) can be easily discriminated by Fe K-XANES, as shown in Fig. 23.9b, and the distribution of Fe(III) can be regarded as the distribution of delithiation. Figure 23.10 shows the changes of the Fe(III) and Fe(II) distributions during two successive charge/discharge cycles. The charge/discharge proceeds inhomogeneously and, interestingly, the electrode reaction starts at the same spots in both the charge and discharge processes, and the redox reactions of the Fe species occur reversibly. The maps of the first and second charge/discharge are similar to each other, indicating high reproducibility and reversibility of the inhomogeneous electrode reaction. Note that such inhomogeneous reactions are specific to the LFP electrode. Other electrodes exhibit other types of reactions, which must be related to local ion and electron conductions. This is a typical example to demonstrate how complicated the battery reactions are.
Chapter 24 Surfaces Hiroshi Kondoh

Introduction
The XAFS spectroscopy has been applied to studies on local geometric and electronic structures of chemical species at surfaces. In this chapter, the contribution of the XAFS spectroscopy to surface science studies are described particularly paying attention to elucidation of the static structures of adsorbates and in-situ observation of surface dynamic processes.
In order to obtain surface-specific information, the electron-yield method is often used in many cases, which includes the total-electron-yield (TEY) method, the partial-electron-yield (PEY) method, and the Auger-electron-yield (AEY) method. Based on the dispersive mode the AEY method has been further upgraded so that the data acquisition time is reduced to be short enough to trace reaction kinetics at surfaces [2]. The electron-yield methods are also used for NEXAFS measurements of surface species under near ambient pressure conditions, which allow us to study surface processes exclusively taking place under near ambient pressure conditions such as catalytic reactions under near realistic conditions [3].
In the case where a specific element is segregated at a surface, the fluorescenceyield (FY) method is also used for collecting surface-specific information [4]. In particular, XAFS spectra for elements heavier than the second period of the periodic table are often measured by the FY method due to the higher probability for the fluorescence decay. The FY method is useful to study surface species under ambient pressure conditions via the photon-in-photon-out measurement. It has been applied to NEXAFS measurements for surface reactants under highpressure conditions including light-element reactants like CO adsorbed on a model catalyst [5]. Recently, the photon-in-photon-out measurement is further used in atoms are located at a distance of c(2 Â 2) lattice (S1 in the inset). The absence of the 3.2 Å peak before self-assembly implies disordering of the S atoms on the Cu surface, though the polarization dependence of C-K NEXAFS spectra indicated that the molecular axes of hexanethiolates are well aligned along the direction tilted by 30 on average from the surface normal before self-assembly. Therefore, the hexanethiolates rapidly form a well-aligned but 2D-disordered monolayer with randomly occupying the hollow sites. This rapid process is followed by slow evolution of the 2D-ordered structure via surface diffusion. Combination of the EXAFS results and force field calculations revealed that a large lattice mismatch between the sulfur layer and the alkyl-chain layer (31 % max) is effectively reduced (7 % max) by tilting half of the S-C bonds that bridges the two layers (37 from the Fig. 24.1 Fourier transforms of S-K EXAFS oscillation for a hexanethiolate monolayer on Cu (100) before (top) and after (bottom) self-assembly. Adapted with permission from Ref. [7]. Copyright 2001, American Chemical Society surface normal), as shown in Fig. 24.2. The S-C bond tilting is observable as a decrease in polarization dependence of the S-C shell in the S-K XAFS spectra after self-assembly. Thus, the XAFS spectroscopy measurements provide detailed structural information that evidences that the lattice mismatch of the molecule/metal system is effectively accommodated by the internal degree of freedom of the molecule, resulting in self-assembly of the molecules.

Surface Electronic Structures
In XAFS measurements core electrons of a particular element are excited to unoccupied states. Since the core electrons are localized near atomic nuclei of the element, the XAFS spectra provide information on local density of states of unoccupied states around the photon-absorbing atoms. Thus, the XAFS spectroscopy enables us to detect unoccupied states localized specifically at surfaces, if the photon-absorbing atoms are segregated at the surfaces. On the basis of this approach, an unoccupied state localized at one-monolayerthick films of saturated hydrocarbon molecules (C 44 H 90 ) adsorbed on a Cu metal surface was identified by C K-edge NEXAFS spectroscopy as shown in Fig. 24.3 [8]. The NEXAFS spectrum of C 44 H 90 bulk exhibits two prominent peaks associated with excitations of C 1s electrons to σ*(C-H) and σ*(C-C) unoccupied states (see Fig. 24.3, left bottom). In the case of the monolayer, however, the σ*(C-H) transition appears as two split shoulders as seen in Fig. 24.3 (left bottom). This splitting was attributed to a difference in interaction of the C-H bonds with the metal surface [9]. Since the saturated hydrocarbons are adsorbed with a flat-lying configuration with the -C-C-backbone plane being parallel to the surface, the C-H bonds of the hydrocarbons are classified into two, i.e., directing upward and downward, resulting in different interactions of the σ*(C-H) states with the surface. The flat-lying configuration in the present system C 44 H 90 /Cu(100) is supported by the incidence angle dependence of the NEXAFS spectra; the σ*(C-C) peak is most enhanced in the normal incidence (90 ), while the σ*(C-H) features become most intense in the grazing incidence (30 ). This polarization dependence is consistent with the flat-lying configuration with the backbone plane parallel to the surface as illustrated in Fig. 24.4 (top left). It should be noted that the monolayer spectra in Fig. 24.3 exhibit a pre-peak at 285.5 eV, which is absent in the bulk spectrum. This feature is attributed to a metal-insulator gap state (MIGS) that is spatially localized at the hydrocarbon monolayer on the Cu(100) surface, as shown in Fig. 24.4 (bottom left) [8]. The density-functional theory (DFT) calculations for polyethylene/Cu (100) indicate that the wave function of the MIGS is distributed perpendicularly to the surface at the hydrocarbon layer as seen in Fig. 24.4 (bottom left), which is consistent with the polarization dependence of the pre-peak shown in Fig. 24.3 (left). The DFT calculations further indicate that the local density of state (LDOS) at the Fermi level shows a clear peak at the hydrocarbon level as shown in Fig. 24.4 (bottom right), although the saturated hydrocarbon (polyethylene) is a wide bandgap insulator and has no LDOS at the Fermi level. This newly appearing LDOS at the hydrocarbon-insulator/metal interface is explained by penetration of Cu 4s freeelectron-like wave functions to the hydrocarbon layer and hence the pre-peak is  (100). Top lefthand inset is the atomic configuration considered here, where Cu is in red, C is in gray, and H is in white. Bottom left-hand side is a contour plot of the wave function at E f . Bottom right-hand inset shows local density of states (LDOS) as a function of z and energy and the LDOS at E F ¼ À0.125 eV (occupied) and E F ¼ +0.125 eV (unoccupied) integrated over the xy plane, as a function of z. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [8]. Copyright 2005, American Physical Society attributed to the MIGS [8]. The MIGS has been found also for LiCl-insulator/metal interfaces using Cl K-edge NEXFAS spectra [10]. Thus, the XAFS spectroscopy can reveal unoccupied LDOS localized at surfaces, when the photon-absorbing atoms are located exclusively at the surfaces.

Surface-Specific Species
The XAFS spectroscopy is used for characterization of surface-specific species that are formed exclusively at surfaces. Novel species with unusual chemical bonds could be formed at surfaces via interactions with surface atoms. Although identification of such species is not straightforward, surface vibrational spectroscopies like infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy (IRAS) and high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS) sometimes play a role in understanding the structures of the surface species. The XAFS spectroscopy is another powerful probe to obtain chemical information of the surface species via probing unoccupied states. Excitations to π * and σ * orbitals of diatomic molecules such as O 2 , for instance, provide information about interactions of the molecules with the surfaces; O K-edge NEXAFS spectra for O 2 -adsorbed metal surfaces at 100 K revealed that O 2 molecules are adsorbed in the form of a peroxo species on Ag (110) and a superoxo species on Pt (111)  [11]. Particularly unusual molecular adsorbates can be identified by comparison with theoretical simulations. For example, heteroaromatic molecules such as thiophene (C 4 H 4 S) adsorbed on Pt and Pd metal surfaces could form metallacycle species where the hetero atom (sulfur) is replaced by a metal atom resulting in the formation of an aromatic ring including the metal atom as a ring member (C 4 H 4 M, M ¼ Pt, Pd). This surface species has been identified by a good agreement between the observed C-K NEXAFS spectra and simulated ones based on the Xα multiple-scattering calculation [1].
Solid surfaces sometimes stabilize unstable species. The NO dimer, (NO) 2 with a planer cis-O ¼ N-N ¼ O geometry, is one of examples for such unstable species due to the weak N-N bond (dissociation energy: 2.0 kcal/mol). The NO dimer has been observed on inert surfaces such as Cu, Ag, graphite, and NO/Rh(111) at low temperatures. For the last surface (NO/Rh(111)), the NO dimer layers were grown on a NO monomer layer formed on Rh (111). Based on a core-excited state molecular orbital calculation, peaks in the pre-edge regions of N K-edge and O K-edge NEXAFS spectra for (NO) 2 /NO/Rh (111) were assigned and the molecular orientations of the second layer and multilayers of the NO dimer were deduced from the polarization dependence and the peak assignments [12].
Figure 24.5a shows N K-edge NEXAFS spectra for the monolayer of NO adsorbed on Rh (111) with different incidence angles from the surface parallel. The π * peak is the most enhanced at the normal incidence (90 ), while the σ * peak appears the most intense at the grazing incidence (15 ), which clearly indicates that the NO molecules are vertically adsorbed. The NEXAFS spectra for the multilayers of NO exhibit totally different curves in the pre-edge region due to the formation of the NO dimer as shown in Fig. 24.5c. From the molecular orbital calculations, the prominent peaks A and B can be attributed to excitations to 2b 1 * (π * (N-O)) and 7b 2 * (σ * (N-N)) unoccupied orbitals, respectively, which have the transition moments lying along the x and y directions, respectively, as shown in Fig. 24.5e. Figure 24.5d shows NEXAFS spectra for the second layer obtained by subtraction of the first monomer layer spectra from the bilayer spectra. Two components with different polarization dependence in the pre-edge region can be associated with the two unoccupied orbitals of the NO dimer 2b 1 * (x) and 7b 2 * ( y) as shown in the inset. Interestingly, there are clear differences in the polarization dependence between the second layer and multilayers of the NO dimer. From the detailed analyses for the polarization dependence, it was found that the N-N bonds in the multilayers are aligned near vertically (tilted by 37 AE 5 from the surface normal), while those in the second layer are more tilted from the surface normal (66 AE 5 ) [12]. The molecular plane in the second layer is also more inclined to the surface parallel compared to that in the multilayers. The molecular orientation in the multilayers is similar to that in a two-dimensional layer of the bulk crystal of the NO dimer where both the N-N bond and the molecular plane are aligned perpendicularly to the layer. The inclined geometry of the N-N bond and the molecular plane to the surface in the second layer is caused by interactions with the NO monomer layer; since the LUMO (2b 1 * ) is aligned along the out-of-plane direction of the NO dimer and has a strong electrophilic character [13], the interaction with the HOMO (π * ) of the NO monomer layer could be maximized by the inclined geometry.

Observation of Surface Dynamic
Processes by Dispersive-NEXAFS
The NEXAFS measurements usually require a fairly long data acquisition time, typically several hundreds seconds per spectrum, due to scanning of the monochromator. This prevented from applying the NEXAFS technique to tracing of the progress of surface dynamic processes such as catalytic surface reaction and film growth. However, by the use of wavelength-dispersed X rays and a spatially resolved electron energy analyzer, auger-electron-yield NEXAFS spectra can be obtained in one shot without scanning of the monochromator as illustrated in Fig. 24.6. This approach enabled recording NEXAFS spectra with a data acquisition time of 30 sec/spectrum at the first stage of development [2] and approximately 10 years later it has reached 33 ms/spectrum [14]. With this technique (dispersive-NEXAFS), the kinetics of catalytic surface reaction can be traced continuously in the real-time manner if the time scale of the kinetics is of the order of second or subsecond. The dispersive-NEXAFS has been applied to elucidation of the mechanisms of prototypical catalytic reactions on metal surfaces such as CO oxidation on Pt(111) [15,16], H 2 O formation on Pt (111), and NO reduction on Rh(111) [17,18]. Figure 24.7a, b shows time evolution of O K-edge dispersive-NEXAFS spectra taken for O-precovered Pt(111) surfaces under CO oxidation conditions at different temperatures (252 and 350 K) [15,16]. Each spectrum was curve-fitted to estimate the O and CO coverages and the resultant coverage changes are plotted as a function of time as shown in Fig. 24.7c, d. The reaction proceeds obviously faster at the  [15,16]. Copyright 2004 and 2005, American Institute of Physics higher temperature and interestingly the reaction kinetics is largely different between the two temperatures; at 252 K an induction period is clearly observed from 1000 to 4000 s, where no surface oxygen atoms are consumed by the CO oxidation reaction. As a consequence, the time course of the reaction at 252 K can be divided into three periods, (i), induction period and (ii) as indicated by the vertical dashed lines. Furthermore, reaction-order analyses revealed that the reaction at period (i) obeys the first-order reaction kinetics with respect to the available O coverage, while that at period (ii) exhibits the half-order kinetics for the O coverage. The reaction at 350 K appears a single process with the first-order kinetics. The first-order and the half-order kinetics can be attributed to CO oxidation by isolated (diffusing) oxygen atoms and peripheral atoms of oxygen islands, respectively [15,16]. Thus, the dispersive-NEXAFS enables us to trace the progress of the surface reaction with respect to time evolution of the reactant coverages and hence to analyze the reaction kinetics quantitatively, which provides important kinetic parameters such as activation energy, prefactor, and reaction order.
Since the dispersive-NEXAFS measurements are performed in an in-situ manner under reaction conditions, it provides an opportunity to find a reaction intermediate if it is a stable and long-lived species. Such a case was found for N + NO reaction on Rh (111). Figure 24.8a shows N K-edge dispersive-NEXAFS spectra for an N-precovered Rh (111) surface under NO exposure at 70 K and Fig. 24.8b depicts peak deconvolution of a dispersive-NEAXFS spectrum [18]. During the course of the NO exposure, a new component starts to appear concomitantly with the ignition of the N + NO reaction. The new component can be attributed to a NO dimer species from the spectral resemblance. The NO dimer species could be formed as the second-layer species as mentioned in Sect. 24.4. According to the density functional theory calculations for the NO dimer on N-precovered Rh (111) surfaces, it can attack surface N due to an electrophilic character of the LUMO and yield N 2 O into the gas-phase with remaining NO on the surface as illustrated in Fig. 24.8c [18]. The NO dimer may play a role of a reaction precursor, although it cannot be completely excluded that it exists as a spectator. Isotope-controlled experiments and results of reaction kinetics analyses support the contribution of the NO dimer as a precursor. Therefore, as demonstrated by this example, the in-situ observations with the dispersive-NEXAFS spectroscopy opened an avenue to access reaction intermediates at surfaces formed under reaction conditions.

In-Situ Ambient-Pressure NEXAFS Observation of Surfaces
The NEXAFS spectroscopy using the electron-yield methods is surface-sensitive due to detection of electrons emitted from the surfaces. However, the emitted electrons undergo inelastic scattering by gas-phase species and the electrondetecting devices such as channeltron and microchannel plate cannot work under high-pressure conditions. The upper limit of pressure allowed for gas dose during measurements of the electron-yield NEXAFS spectra is typically of the 10 À5 Torr order. This is obviously much lower than the ambient pressure, even though practical devices such as butteries and industrial catalysts are usually working under ambient-pressure and even higher pressure conditions, which is regarded as a problem of pressure gap. To bridge this gap, much effort has been dedicated to develop an ambient-pressure-compatible NEXAFS spectroscopy (AP-NEXAFS) [19][20][21][22]. Figure 24.9 (up right) shows an illustration for the experimental setup for the AP-NEXAFS technique using two TEY collection electrodes with a thin polyimide X-ray window [21]. The first electrode with a grid is biased at zero or negatively (> À15 V) and used for collection of auger electrons from gas-phase species (I gas ), precursor. Adapted with permission from Ref. [18]. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society while the second electrode with a hole is positively biased (< +40 V) and detects electrons from both the gas-phase species and the sample surface (I det ) [19]. The photo-induced current of the sample was measured without applying bias voltage as a sample current (I sample ), which exhibited a photon-energy-dependent curve similar to that for I det [19]. With this setup I det and I gas were measured for a Cu catalyst at 520 K under exposure to O 2 /CH 3 OH mixed gas at 0.56 mbar as a function of photon energy as shown in Fig. 24.9 (middle). Subtraction of I gas from I det after intensity normalization at the energy of the π* resonance of O 2 gas yields an O K-edge NEXAFS spectrum from the Cu catalyst surface under the reaction condition, as shown in Fig. 24.9 (bottom) [21]. Since the contribution from the gas-phase To avoid the gas-phase contribution the use of the electron-energy analyzer is sometimes effective, because the Auger electron spectra from the gas phase and the sample surface exhibit different kinetic-energy dependence and hence allow us to distinguish the contributions from the two phases. Furthermore, the electronenergy analyzer has been upgraded so that XPS spectra can be measured under near ambient pressure conditions by using a differential pumping system with electrostatic lenses [23]. This type of analyzer has been applied to measurements of AP-NEXAFS spectra with the AEY mode [22]. Schematics for the AEY AP-NEXAFS setup and actual auger electron spectra from sample exhibits a steplike increase in background intensity at the lower kinetic energies from the primary Auger peak due to multiple inelastic scattering in the solid, while the O 2 gas phase shows a more concentrated intensity at around the primary Auger peak. This enables us to enhance the sample surface-related signal more than the gas-phaserelated one by choosing the kinetic energy window properly. A resultant surfacesensitive AEY AP-NEXAFS spectrum from the VO x sample measured in 0.5 mbar O 2 is depicted in Fig. 24.10c (top). Apparently several dips are seen in the spectrum, which is caused by absorption of X-rays by O 2 gas phase as confirmed by the O 2 gas phase transmission spectrum taken with the TEY collection electrode shown in Fig. 24.10c (middle). A NEXAFS spectrum reconstructed by the transmission spectrum is shown in Fig. 24.10c (bottom) and is in good agreement with a spectrum measured in vacuum. These experimental results demonstrate that the AEY AP-NEXAFS technique has the capability to obtain nondistorted NEXAFS spectra from sample surfaces under the presence of near ambient pressure gas(es).

Future Perspective
Time-resolved experiments using the dispersive-NEXAFS technique will contribute to elucidation of molecular-level mechanisms of surface dynamic processes. In 2011, NEXAFS spectra from submonolayer adsorbates could be obtained every 33 ms continuously [14] and recently the data acquisition time has been further reduced to 333 μs/spectrum. Irreversible surface processes such as adsorption and desorption can be monitored at a submillisecond timescale continuously. If the dispersive-NEAXFS data acquisition is conducted for a repeatable surface process and synchronized with a single X-ray pulse from a single-electron bunch, the time resolution of NEXAFS reaches the X-ray pulse width, i.e., several tens picosecond. Photo-induced surface phenomena such as photo-stimulated desorption and photocatalytic surface reaction are possible targets to be studied with the timeresolved NEXAFS spectroscopy.
Spatially resolved NEXAFS experiments have been performed by a micro-or nano-beam focused with a KB mirror or a zone plate. Beam damages induced by the focused beam prevent further improvement of spatial resolution. The X-ray photoemission electron microscope technique is also suitable to NEXAFS microscopy for surface species. To improve the spatial resolution the scanning probe microscopy technique has been combined, where the scanning probe is used as a detector of X-ray absorption-induced responses. Since it requires a prolonged time to take a NEXAFS microscopy image, application to surface dynamic processes needs a breakthrough to achieve a much higher efficiency to detect position and energydependent responses to irradiation of X rays.
The in-situ NEAFS spectroscopy for surfaces is still under upgrading and expanding the expected application area. Particularly in the fields of catalysts and power devices, in operando observations of surfaces of functional materials under working conditions are becoming more important to understand the mechanism and improve their performances. In this sense, the emerging in-situ NEAFS spectroscopy for surfaces is expected to play a crucial role in studies on such materials. Near future operando observation with XPS and NEXAFS will be a powerful approach to analyze geometric structures and occupied and unoccupied electronic structures at surfaces of a wide variety of functional materials under working conditions.

Chapter 25

Sensors
Hudson W.P. Carvalho, David Degler, Nicolae Barsan, and Jan-Dierk Grunwaldt

Introduction
Knowledge on structural properties is essential to understand the working principle of gas sensing devices based on Semiconducting Metal OXides (SMOX). For sensors, like for many other functional materials, nano-sized structures as well as the nature of surfaces and interfaces define the materials' properties. As will be shown in this chapter, X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) in terms of X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) was first used to analyze ex situ the powders used to prepare the sensing layers. Later, XAS was employed to explore model sensors containing high dopant loading and exposed to elevated gas concentrations. The current trend seeks to investigate real sensor devices. This implies studies on porous oxide layers with low dopant loading, at elevated temperatures (100-400 C) and realistic reaction conditions such as low analyte gas concentrations (ppm) in oxygen (20-21 vol%) and interfering components such as water (10-60 % relative H.W.P. Carvalho Centro de Energia Nuclear na Agricultura, 13400-970 Piracicaba -São Paulo, Brasil Institute for Chemical Technology and Polymer Chemistry (ITCP) and Institute of Catalysis Research and Technology (IKFT), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany humidity). As the fundamentals of XAS and related photon-in/photon-out techniques (HERFD-XANES, XES) have been previously discussed in this book, this chapter focuses mainly on the potential and limitations using the techniques in the field of chemical gas sensors. This includes a brief introduction to the current state of the art and proposed mechanisms of gas sensing. Special focus is laid on the main advantages and some of the smart approaches presented in the literature when XAS is applied to the characterization of gas sensors. Hence, both experimental aspects and selected examples are described.

Approach to Characterize Gas Sensors
Besides common material characterization techniques such as transmission or scanning electron microscopy (TEM or SEM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and X-ray diffraction (XRD), gas sensing materials are studied by various operando techniques, probing the materials' electronic or chemical properties. DC resistance measurements, impedance spectroscopy (AC resistance), Hall effect measurements, and work function measurements (Kelvin Probe) are common techniques for determining the electronic properties of SMOX sensors under operation conditions [1][2][3][4]. In addition to these techniques, operando spectroscopic methods such as IR emission spectroscopy [5,6], diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) [7,8], and Raman spectroscopy [9,10] are used to study the surface chemistry of gas sensors in various gas atmospheres. Moreover, several in situ and ex situ techniques have been applied on SMOX powders, such as EPR, UV/vis, or CEMS [11]. An overview of operando techniques for gas sensor research, which has tremendously increased over the past years (cf. ref. [1]), is given in Fig. 25.1. The approach has become very similar to the characterization of catalysts [12].
However, some of common material characterization techniques are not suitable or are very demanding for operando research since they require vacuum conditions (TEM, SEM, XPS) or long-range ordered materials (XRD); the latter one is not suited for low concentrated dopant structures or unlikely for changes caused by ppm concentrations of analyte gases. In contrast, XAS in terms of XANES and EXAFS provides detailed information on the local structure of both semiconductor materials and also of dopants when they are present. As detailed later, the technique can be used to ex situ study the sensing powder or sensor devices. Furthermore, XAS can also be employed to investigate the local chemical structure of sensors under real operando conditions. This latter approach is of major relevance, since the local structure might change according to the temperature, atmosphere, and electrical polarization.
Like X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy the analysis of XANES spectra (e.g., by linear combination fitting) can be used to determine the oxidation states of elements. In addition, EXAFS gives direct structural information, but in contrast to XRD not only on long-range ordered materials. For studying gas sensing materials one of the most important benefits of XAS is the possibility of performing experiments under in situ or operando conditions, since the oxidation state and structure depend on temperature and atmospheric composition, or with respect to vacuum techniques the presence of an atmosphere at all. Two major phenomena that take place at the sensor need to be considered: (1) the chemical reaction between the analyte gas and the sensing layer, which is intrinsically a surface process and (2) the charge transfer between the grains, which depends on both grain bulk structure and grain-grain interface. Thus, the response of the sensing layer strongly depends on its structure. To understand the chemical reaction during sensing the XAS experiment has to be designed to mainly probe the local chemical environment of the atoms on the surface. To investigate the charge carrier transfer process, one may easily address the bulk structure by conventional XAS.

A Brief State-of-the-Art of Gas Sensors
In the 1950s, the pioneering works of Heiland [13] and Bielanski [14] showed that the resistance of SMOX depends on the composition of the surrounding atmosphere. In the 1960s, a SMOX-based sensor device was introduced as a detector for gas chromatography, followed by the first commercial gas sensors developed by Tagushi in the 1970s [15]. Today, SMOX-based gas sensors play an important role in the detection of ppm or lower concentrations of toxic or flammable gases, such as CO, NO x , CH 4 , and H 2 [16,17]. Increasing demands on the gas sensing performance lead to new developments and the strong need of understanding the gas sensing process on various levels and scales [1].

Sensing Mechanism: Oxides, Role of Ions and Nanoparticles as Dopants
Typical SMOX used for gas sensing are WO 3 , In 2 O 3 (ITO), or ZnO, etc., but none of these materials are in both academia and industry as common as SnO 2 [16,17]. The working principle of SnO 2 and other n-type SMOX, operated at temperatures around 300 C, is based on two processes that are linked to the concentration of ionosorbed surface oxygen [18]. The first process is the reception, which is based on the interaction of an analyte gas with the SMOX surface. In case of a reducing gas such as CO this process is the oxidation of CO, reaction with ionosorbed surface oxygen, to CO 2 (Fig. 25.2a). The consumption of ionosorbed surface oxygen releases electrons to the material, which by the second process called transduction decreases the sensor's resistance, i.e., creating a sensor signal.
In the porous sensing layers, which consist of small crystallite grains, the charge transport is limited by the intergrain resistance controlled by back-to-back Schottky contacts, or Schottky barriers (Fig. 25.2b). The level of the barriers depends on the surface band bending that describes the surface concentration of free charge carriers and is determined by the ionosorption of oxygen [18]. Since the concentration of ionosorbed oxygen is controlled by adsorption of atmospheric oxygen, desorption, and the reaction with reducing gases, the resistance is directly linked to the composition of the surrounding atmosphere [17,18]. Besides the advantages of SMOX like SnO 2 such as low cost, robustness, and sensitivity they have some disadvantages, such as a poor selectivity, strong cross interferences, and lack of long-term stability. To overcome these disadvantages, i.e., improve the sensitivity, selectivity, and stability of SMOX-based gas sensors, low concentrations (0.1-5 wt%) of noble metals (e.g., Pd, Pt, Au, or various other metals/transition metals) are introduced into the sensing materials, a method that is commonly referred to as doping or sensitization of the sensing layer [17]. Depending on their distribution, structure, and oxidation state these dopants influence the chemical (reception) and/or electronic (transduction) properties of the material: Metallic clusters presented at the surface are assumed to mainly change the surface chemistry, while oxide clusters are expected to have an impact on the chemistry and the electronic properties of the material [20][21][22]. Like oxide clusters, atomically dispersed dopants influence the chemical and electronic properties; if they are present in the bulk their electronic effect is considerable, especially when they show oxidation states different from the sensing material itself [23]. This demonstrates the importance of structural information to understand the effect of the noble metals introduced into the sensing layer.

Experimental Aspects of X-ray Absorption
Spectroscopy Experiments

Ex Situ Studies on Gas Sensors
The majority of the XAS studies has been focused on the structure of the semiconductor layer. Since SnO 2 is the most widely used material, there is plenty of information on the local structure of Sn oxide-based materials prepared by different methods such sol-gel, precipitation, sputtering, etc. [24][25][26]. For example, XAS has been used complementary to XRD to investigate the disorder (mean square deviation of interatomic distances) and the particle size (based on the number of neighbors at higher shells). XAS is complementary to XRD as it is not restricted to crystalline phases; moreover, it provides information on the local disorder instead of on the long-range one. Other semiconductors such as ZnO [27,28] have also been reported. In addition, dopants such as Pt [29][30][31], Pd [32][33][34], Au [22], Cu [35,36], Fe [35][36][37] have been in the focus of XAS investigations.
Although ex situ studies pioneered the use of XAS for the characterization of sensors and set the bases for further accomplishments, we will see in the next sections that chemical environment probed in a pellet is not necessarily the same as the one found under operando conditions. XAS has been mostly used to characterize the powders used to prepare the sensitive layers; in this case, the samples are usually measured as pressed pellets diluted in cellulose, boron nitride [38], or polyethylene [39]. Similarly, although less frequently, the measurements can be carried out directly on the sensor device, i.e., recording XAS spectra for the sensing layers after the deposition on the top of the electrodes. The technique has been employed to characterize the local chemical environment of the metal species composing the semiconducting layer, dopants [30,32], and in some cases multiple edge approach is used to investigate both [39]. More details on the impact of these studies are given in Sect. 25.5.
Regarding the detection mode, the choice follows the traditional experimental conditions. In case of powders, if the concentration of the noble metal dopant allows, the transmission detection mode has been preferred. If the noble metal dopant concentration is too low to acquire a reasonable transmission XAS spectrum, or if the experimentalist intends to study the sensing layer, which is usually deposited on the top of a thick substrate (silicon, Al 2 O 3 , etc.), other detection modes such as X-ray fluorescence or electron yield might be considered. Total electron yield was successfully used to study nondoped SnO 2 sensing layers [25]. Since the probability of escape of photoelectrons coming from beneath the surface exponentially decreases as a function of depth, this detection mode presents some surface sensitivity ranging from tens to hundreds of nanometers. Despite of that, this detection mode is not ideal for operando measurements since the ejected photoelectrons may not reach the detector due to inelastic collisions with the gas atmosphere.
X-ray fluorescence detection mode can be easily implemented to study sensors, this mode has two important advantages: (1) operando measurements under reaction conditions can be performed since hard X-rays are not significantly absorbed by the atmosphere and (2) depending on the roughness of the surface grazing incidence detection mode results in surface sensitivity.

In Situ Studies on Chemical Sensors
Although the conditions faced by in situ studies are much more challenging than those for ex situ measurements, in situ studies are carried out with model sensors. It means that the dopants and gas concentrations are much higher than those found for real sensor devices. For example, in the called model sensors, the wt% of dopants may reach two digits of magnitude and gases are also in the order of v/v%, whereas in real devices these values may be smaller than 1 wt% and gases in the order of few ppm (v/v).
The degree of complexity of the experiments also depends on the state of the art of the X-ray sources and detectors. As brighter sources and detectors with lower detection limits have been developed more realistic sensor devices and conditions can be explored. Hence, the results of in situ studies might be carefully interpreted since they might give a flavor of the sensing mechanism but not the actual mechanism.
Once chosen the detection mode and conditions of the experiments (e.g., gases, humidity, or temperature) one has to decide what kind of cell/test house should be employed to address the raised questions. In situ studies have proved to be especially important when one seeks to investigate the role of dopants. From historical perspective XAS was first used to investigate the influence of the gas atmosphere on the chemical environment of sensor materials such as dopants and semiconductors, this we have called in situ studies. Later then XAS was combined to electrical measurements that allowed investigating the local order of atoms and simultaneously recording the electrical response of the sensor; these are the operando studies.
In situ measurements can be carried out exposing the sensor powders or devices to an atmosphere containing the analyte gas, such as CO or H 2 . An example of such a type of study was reported by Davis et al. [36] in which the powders were diluted in fumed silica pressed and exposed to CO at high temperatures.

Operando Studies on Chemical Sensors
As stated before, operando studies seek to investigate the sensor devices as close as possible of its real working conditions, i.e., very low dopant and probe gas concentrations. In commercial devices dopants are usually noble metals such as Pt, Pd, or Au; thus they are employed in the minimum required concentration. One of the major challenges for in situ and operando measurements consists in the development of a reaction cell that would allow recording XAS spectra and at the same time controlling the atmosphere (cf. Chap. 6), temperature and ideally registering the electrical response given by the sensor device. An example of a successful design is presented in Fig. 25.3. This in situ cell was developed by some of the authors of this book chapter and used in several published studies [22,29,33]. It consists of a stainless steel body and sealed Kapton™ window. Due to its compact design it can be adapted to virtually any beamline.
XAS experimentalists must also be aware that the X-ray beam may heat the sensor or change the semiconductor electronic transport properties. Luckily, the parallel recorded resistance allows one to assess to which extent the beam exposure affects the sensor performance. In some cases recording XAS for sensor devices can be very challenging. Let us consider the example of a sensitive layer doped with Pt. The electrodes shown in Fig. 25.1 are usually made of Pt and the heaters are also made of Pt. As previously mentioned, Pt is one of the widest used dopants. Thus if all these three components are made of Pt, it would be impossible to study only Pt present in the sensing layer since the XAS signal would be an average of the Pt coming from sensing layer, heater, and electrodes. To surmount this obstacle our group developed a device in which the electrodes were made of Au and the heaters made of PdAg alloy. On top of these a real sensing layer was deposited.
Pt L 3 edge is located at 11,564 eV while Au L 3 edge appears at 11,919 eV. Therefore, using a conventional energy-dispersive X-ray fluorescence (resolution ΔE/E 0.01-0.03, c.a. 100-300 eV) detector is impossible to record a 1000 eV EXAFS spectrum for Pt without detecting the Au edge appearing in the middle of the spectrum of Pt. One way to circumvent this inconvenient consists in recording the EXAFS spectrum in High Energy Resolution Fluorescence Detection (HERFD) mode [40][41][42]. Employing this detection mode allows recording the fluorescence yield within an energy window ranging at few electrons volts, e.g., 2-5 eV. Other important advantages of HERFD detection mode consist in the circumvention of the XAS spectral core-hole lifetime broadening, the result is a spectrum with sharper and clearer features. Additionally, the sensitivity to the oxidation state dramatically increases. Outstanding examples of the application of HERFD XAS to the study of sensors can be found in references [16,23,24].

Selected Examples

Ex Situ Studies: Doped Oxides, Sensor Devices or Sensor Powders
A typical example of ex situ analysis of powders used to produce sensors was given by Kanai et al. [39]. Several α-Fe 2 O 3 -SnO 2 composites oxides, varying the molar fraction of SnO 2 , were prepared by thermal treatment of co-precipitated Fe 3þ sulfate and Sn 2þ chlorides. The powders were tested as CH 4 sensing materials, it was found that the sensitivity was dependent on the amount of SnO 2 in α-Fe 2 O 3 , the maximum sensing activity was given by the 15-20 mol% SnO 2 in α-Fe 2 O 3 . The Sn K and Fe K XAS analyses showed that SnO 2 can be incorporated in the lattice of α-Fe 2 O 3 , but only up to 15 mol% of SnO 2 . Above this threshold phase segregation occurs and the α-Fe 2 O 3 becomes irregular. Thus, the sensing activity was attributed to the solid solution formed between SnO 2 and α-Fe 2 O 3 .
Complementary to the powder approach, the ex situ analysis of the sensor device may also provide important structural information. It can capture any structural changes that might have occurred during the deposition of the powders on the electrodes. A very instructive case was presented by Serrini et al. [25]. The local structure of several SnO 2 prepared by sputtering was thoroughly evaluated. The authors prepared thin films sensing layers with thickness ranging from 200 to 480 nm; moreover, the O 2 /Ar ratio was varied during the deposition and also the effect of temperature on the substrate was investigated. Besides XAS the sensors were complementarily characterized by XRD and XPS. The sensing activity was tested against CO and NO 2 . The authors pointed out the advantage of XAS over XRD in the determination of very small grain sizes, e.g., < 2 nm, for SnO 2 and most oxides the experimentalist can derive grain/crystallite size from the coordination numbers of outer shells such as second and third. Furthermore, XAS showed the presence of a contaminant β-Sn phase that might have contributed to decrease the sensor response to the analyte; this content was not detected by XRD. Finally, the combination of XAS and XRD showed that, after the thin film deposition, thermal treatment does not increase the grain size; however, the mean-square deviation of interatomic distances (EXAFS Debye-Waller factor) decreased. The results showed that the sensor performance is dependent on a combination of factors such as abundance of oxygen species on the surface (determined by XPS), small crystallites in the range of 3-4 nm, and low structural disorder. Altogether it allowed inferring that at the same time the particles must be as small as possible to have a large surface area for the analyte; however, particle itself and the boundary between grains must allow the electron conduction.

Examples for In Situ and Operando Studies
One of the first investigations for in situ measurements was carried out by Gaidi et al. [43]. They approached the role of Pt dopant in SnO 2 -based sensor for CO detection [20,21]. Pt-doped SnO 2 (3 at%, 6 at%, and 12 at% Pt) was prepared by co-deposition of precursors on oxidized Si substrate by the aerosol pyrolysis method. The procedure resulted in 3-5 nm Pt particles within SnO 2 and the influence of the atmosphere on the Pt chemical environment was investigated. A special cell was developed in which the temperature and atmosphere could be controlled; however, details on the in situ cell were not found. In this specific case the XANES measurements were carried out at Pt L 3 edge between 25 and 350 C. Under air at 350 C the 3 at% Pt sensor was more oxidized than the 12 at% Pt, this result highlights the important structural difference caused by the Pt loading and most likely Pt particle size. The authors also observed that CO was able to reduce the Pt dopant; however, the kinetics were temperature dependent. Pt was reduced faster at low temperatures. XAS combined to nonsimultaneous electrical measurements led the researchers to conclude that PtO 2 is reduced by CO forming Pt. Then Pt reacts with chemisorbed O 2 regenerating the PtO 2 . This interplay between oxidized and reduced Pt was appointed the responsible for electrical response of the sensor.
Simultaneous XANES and electrical measurements on similar Pt-doped SnO 2 samples were later reported by the same group [31]. The authors showed a very interesting correlation between the electrical conductance of Pt-doped SnO 2 and the oxidation state of Pt. The highest conductance was achieved when Pt species were reduced. This electrical response was attributed to the donation of electrons from metallic Pt to the conduction band of SnO 2 . However, as described later, in real sensors with low concentration of Pt one could not detect the formation of a metallic phase.
Further operando studies using even harsher conditions were more recently reported for Pt, Au, and Pd-doped SnO 2 . One should keep in mind that real sensors might present very low concentration of noble metal dopants, i.e., significantly lower than 1 wt%. Moreover, the sensing layer is porous and thin, c.a. 50 μm as shown in Fig. 25.1. Altogether it means that total loading of the analyte for XAS is extremely low. To record XAS for 0.2 wt% Pt in SnO 2 real sensor under working conditions (250 ppm CO and 50 ppm H 2 ), Hübner et al. [29] replaced the Pt electrodes by Au and Pt heaters by Ag/Pd alloy. EXAFS analysis showed that Pt atoms were coordinated by oxygen and located in the lattice of SnO 2 . Interestingly, the HERFD-XANES showed that Pt within SnO 2 structure is even more electron deficient than PtO 2 reference compound. HERFD-XANES registered under working conditions simultaneously to the electrical resistance measurements showed that only a very small change in Pt electronic structure is observed under operando conditions. Therefore, the hypothesis of spillover of H 2 or O 2 promoted by Pt metallic cluster as responsible for the improvement in sensing properties had to be reassessed. In its turn, the authors suggested that the Pt insertion in the lattice of SnO 2 changes the semiconductor properties, for example Pt atoms might donate electrons to SnO 2 changing its Fermi level.
Au-doped SnO 2 was also investigated using HERFD-XANES [22]. However Au, even at low concentrations such as 0.2 wt%, is not incorporated into the lattice of SnO 2 . In this case Au is found as small metallic clusters, and it showed virtually no spectral changes in the presence of 50 ppm CO and H 2 ppm H 2 , while important changes in the resistance were observed. Therefore, this result ruled out the conjecture of CO or H 2 chemical bond with Au surface atoms. The authors have concluded that Au spills oxygen atoms over the surface of SnO 2 , and the oxidation of CO and H 2 takes place on SnO 2 .
Finally, one of the most recent operando XAS studies on sensor reported by our group dealt with 0.2 and 1 wt% Pd-doped SnO 2 prepared by flame spray pyrolysis (FSP) and powder impregnation (PI) methods [44]. EXAFS analysis helped to understand the initial state of the Pd, it showed that in PI prepared sensors Pd atoms presented second and third shells, although the curve fitting to theoretical data showed that the number of neighbors was smaller than the one found for PdO bulk oxide. Such higher shells were absent for FSP made sensors. The XANES data recorded under working (50 ppm H 2 /air) and reducing (5000 ppm H 2 /He) conditions was subjected to linear combination analysis. The ratio between oxidized and reduced Pd species was determined. Figure 25.4a presents the linear combination results obtained for 1 wt% Pd-doped SnO 2 prepared by FSP and deposited by the screen printed method and Fig. 25.4b shows the spectra recorded in different conditions.
Besides the method employed to obtain the Pd-SnO 2 powder, the procedure used to make the sensing layer plays a major role in sensing properties and chemical environment of Pd under working conditions. Directly deposited FSP layers are more porous than screen-printed ones; thus Pd atoms were partially reduced under 50 ppm H 2 . FSP and PI layers deposited by the screen-printed method resulted in modest reduction (<10 %) of Pd under working conditions. Under reducing conditions PI samples were almost completely reduced whereas in FSP a fraction of Pd (nearly 20 %) persisted oxidized. This was interpreted as an indication that part of the Pd atoms obtained by the FSP method was incorporated within the SnO 2 lattice, the absence of higher shells in EXAFS also pointed out that Pd atoms are well dispersed on the surface, and those incorporated by SnO 2 might be in highly disordered environment.

Present Trends and Outlook
One of the key parts for operando studies in the field of sensing but also related fields, such as catalysis, is the design of in situ cells (cf. Chap. 6). As it is always aiming at the best compromise to study the structure and the sensor performance, new operando studies need to be constructed depending on the system of interest. Additionally, the combination of XAS with further spectroscopic techniques, e.g., IR, Raman, or UV/vis, will be of great interest. On the one hand from one experiment more information is available, which is also a trend in catalysis. On the other hand, the X-ray exposure may influence the material and alter the results, e.g., local heating or electronic effects. Since during all operando spectroscopic experiments the DC resistance of the sensor is recorded, separate experiments can be compared on the basis of the DC measurements afterward. This approach avoids mutual effects of the radiation, but surely doubles the effort for the measurements. Alternated recording XAS and other techniques are still time-consuming and not favorable regarding the limited access to suitable X-ray sources.
Additionally to the atomic local chemical environment, i.e., coordination numbers, atomic distances, and mean square deviation of atomic distances probed by XAS, one can draw attention to the electronic structure, i.e., probing the valence orbitals. Typically, the structure of the electronic outer shells is explored by UPS and soft X-ray techniques, which eliminate the possibility of carrying out operando studies since these tools require vacuum conditions. New photon-in/photon-out techniques based on hard X-rays have, however, recently become available which allow probing the electronic structure of valence orbitals under operando conditions. Such methods, for example X-ray emission spectroscopy, have now also been applied on realistic samples at various synchrotron radiation facilities [45][46][47]. Complementary structural information can be gained, e.g., valence-to-core XES can differentiate between ligands even with similar atomic number such as O from N. In addition, it is sensitive to protonation that is hardly detected by XAS since H is a poor scatterer. Resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS) has also great potential to be employed in the study of sensors since it can capture the electronic structure of outer electrons, as previously pointed out in this chapter the electron exchange between analyte and sensing layer or between the particles forming the sensing layer is a fundamental step that generates the signal of the analyte.

Conclusion
XAS applied to gas sensors provides a good example for how this spectroscopic technique can be used to unravel structure-function relationships. The wellestablished procedures, e.g., sample preparation and cell design, make it easier to transfer these concepts to other fields of materials science. diversity and flexibility in composition (see below Figs. 26.1 and 26.2) and have less demanding topological constraints in the formation of the porous lattices. The enormous number of new MOFs reported every year reflects this flexibility and the large interest for their potential applications [21]. Zeolites are strictly based on tetrahedral building units and their different topologies are based on the possibility to make a finite number of secondary building units [22], whereas the inorganic cornerstone in MOF topologies may be a single metal atom or a more or less complex cluster of coordinated metal atoms or extended inorganic sub-structures extending in one, two or three dimensions. According to the recent classification done by Tranchemontagne et al. [23] the coordination of the inorganic cornerstone may span the whole range from 3 up to 66.
Completely different frameworks can be obtained by keeping the same linker connectivity and changing the cornerstone geometry, see Fig. 26.1a, or by fixing the cornerstone geometry and changing the linker connectivity, see Fig. 26.1b. On top of this, cornerstones can be connected using different type of organic linkers, giving rise to the synthesis of isoreticular frameworks such as the IRMOF-1/IRMOF-16 [24] or the UiO-66/UiO-68 [25][26][27] series, see Fig. 26.1c.
Although the industrial application of MOFs is still limited to a few cases [29,30], this new class of materials is foreseen to play an important role in the next future, in the fields of: (1) gas separation and purification in general [31][32][33][34], and in particular: selective adsorption of H 2 or over N 2 or CO [35], bulk separation of CO 2 under near-ambient conditions for the biogas upgrading [36][37][38][39], selective capture of CO 2 [40][41][42], of CH 4 [40], or of O 2 [43], for hydrocarbons separation [44], selective adsorption air purification of toxic chemicals [45,46], enantioselective sorption of alcohols [47]; (2) liquid phase separation; [33,48] (3) adsorption and storage of gases [49][50][51][52][53][54]; (4) materials for drug delivery [55][56][57][58];
(5) optical and luminescent materials [59][60][61][62][63][64][65][66][67]; (6) photoactivable materials [68]; (7) magnetic materials [69,70]; (8) solid state ion conductors [71]; (9) proton conductors [72,73]; (10) materials for electronic and optoelectronic devices [74]; (11) materials for sensors [67]; (12) catalysis in general [28,[75][76][77][78][79] and in particular for: enantioselective chiral reactions [80][81][82][83][84]; (13) photocatalysis [85,86].
As deeply described in several authoritative reviews and book chapters [87][88][89][90][91][92][93][94][95][96][97][98], the functionalization of MOF materials remains one of the main challenges driving the MOF community, to make newer and newer structures, with specific functionalities. Indeed, the metal sites in most of the MOF structures show at maximum one coordination vacancy (and only after removal of the solvent, see the HKUST-1 and the CPO-27-Ni cases discussed in Sects. 26.3.3 and 26.3.5, respectively), therefore limiting their application for example in catalysis, where at least two coordination vacancies are required.
MOFs functionalization (see Fig. 26.2 for some examples) is generally performed following two main routes: (1) by using during the synthesis linkers containing functionalized groups [85,[99][100][101][102][103] or (2) by performing post-synthesis modification of MOFs framework. The latter approach includes incorporating arenetricarbonyl complexes [ÀC 6 H 4 M(CO) 3 À] (M¼Cr, Mo) on the linkers by interaction with M-carbonyls [104][105][106]; performing click reaction between the azide groups in the MOF linker network and external alkynes [107,108]; reduction of the aldehyde functionality of imidazolate-2-carboxyaldehyde linker by NaBH 4 , to obtain the alcohol functionality and successive conversion to imine functionality by reaction with ethanolamine [109]; insertion in the linker of -NH 2 groups by interaction with nicotinoyl chloride [110]; formation of -NHCOCH 3 or longer amide groups by interaction of -NH 2 groups with different acid anhydrides [102,111,112]; metalation reaction on N-containing organic linkers [103,113]; carboxy-functionalization [114]; amine-functionalization [115,116]; incapsulation of metal nanoparticles MOFs cavities [117,118]. In this chapter, examples of functionalized MOFs characterized by XAFS techniques are reported in Sects. 26.3.2 (Pt-functionalized UiO-67) and 3.4 (phosphine-functionalized MIL-101).

Relevance of XAS-Techniques in Understanding the Structure and the Reactivity of MOFs Materials
The fact that MOFs are mainly constituted by low Z elements (C, O, N, H) implies that they are almost transparent to hard X-rays; [11,[119][120][121] this allows to collect, at the metal K-(for 2 nd and 3 rd row elements) or L-edges (for 4 th and 5 th row and  The complementarity between long range order, investigated by diffraction techniques, and local range order, investigated by EXAFS, has already been recognized for complex systems, such as metalloproteins [127,128], disordered mixed oxides [129,130], ternary and quaternary semiconductor solid solutions [131,132] and is here debated for MOFs. Actually, the chapter has a wider view as it deals with X-ray absorption spectroscopies, i.e., including both EXAFS [133][134][135][136] and X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) [137][138][139][140][141]. Unfortunately, due to space limitations, we do not consider X-ray emission spectroscopy (XES) [103,[142][143][144][145][146][147][148][149][150][151][152][153][154] that has become in the last decade a very promising technique.

Selected Recent Examples
The role of XAS and related spectroscopies in understanding the structure and the reactivity of metal centers in metal-organic framework was reviewed by some of us in 2010 [11]. In that critical review we report cases where EXAFS and XANES have been relevant in understanding the structural and electronic properties of metal clusters in MOFs. In particular, materials with cluster cornerstones (zero dimensional) and coordination four (HKUST-1, or Cu 3 (BTC) 2 ) [155], six (MOF-5) [156], nine (Pt-Gd-MOF [100] and Pt-Y-MOF [99]), and twelve (UiO-66 [25,26] and Ni-cubane [157]) as well as one example of MOF (CPO-27 [123][124][125][126]) with a one dimensional inorganic backbone were discussed.
MOFs are crystalline materials with a complex structure (see above Figs. 26.1 and 26.2), consequently, very little information can be extracted from EXAFS data alone. To perform a complete EXAFS data analysis, able to reconstruct the whole inorganic cornerstone and its binding to the organic part, i.e., to reconstruct the local environment of a metal center up to 4-5 Å, a guessed 3D structure is mandatory. Usually the 3D structure comes from a diffraction study, but it may also come from ab initio optimization [26,27]. In review [11] it was shown that EXAFS can be successfully used for the following purposes: 1. To just confirm the structure obtained from X-ray or neutron powder diffraction refinements (hydroxylated UiO-66 [25,26], hydrated HKUST-1 [155], Ni-cubane [157], and as prepared Pt/Gd- [100] and Pt-Y-MOF; [99] MOF) 2. To highlight that the inorganic cornerstone has a lower symmetry with respect to that of the organic framework, that escaped the powder diffraction refinement (dehydroxylated UiO-66); [25,26]). 3. To obtain the local structure of the inorganic cluster in the desolvated material when desolvation causes a fragmentation of single crystals accompanied by a partial and reversible loss of long range ordering that causes peaks broadening, making impossible the structure solution from XRPD (dehydrated Pt/Gd-MOF) [100] or when simply the XRPD refinement (notwithstanding the quality of the collected pattern) does not reach a safe convergence (dehydrated HKUST-1); [155]).
4. To obtain the local structure of the inorganic cluster in the desolvated material after coordination of a probe (or reactant) molecule, including cluster deformation upon molecule coordination and metal-molecule binding distance (HKUST-1 [155] and CPO-27-Ni; [123][124][125][126]158]. 5. To highlight the presence of impurities in form of an amorphous extra-phase that escaped detection by diffraction methods (some MOF-5 synthesis) [156].
In review [11] it has also been underlined that, for points (3) and ( 4) the starting model to refine the EXAFS datum is that obtained from the refinement of the diffraction data collected on the solvated material, after removal of the solvent molecule (3), or after replacement of the solvent molecule by a probe molecule (4). In the latter case the number of coordinated probe molecules as well as the adsorption geometry may be critical to be disclosed by EXAFS alone, because the scattering contribution from the probe molecule is usually a small fraction of the overall EXAFS signal, that is still dominated by the scattering of the ordered framework atoms. In these cases any help coming from independent techniques (IR, Raman, volumetric microcalorimetry, gravimetric adsorption, etc.) is welcome to reduce the number of independent parameters optimized in the EXAFS data analysis. We show in this chapter (Sect. 26.3.5) the relevance of the use of accurate simulation of XANES to disclose the geometry and the stoichiometry of the metal site after adsorption.
On one hand it is evident that, beside point (1), EXAFS spectroscopy is a fundamental tool to disclose the local structure of the metal MOFs cornerstones. On the other hand, the existence of clear examples discussed in point ( 2) and ( 5), where diffraction methods alone resulted in a wrong solution for the structure of the inorganic clusters, makes cases listed in point (1) not a trivial exercise but an important structural check, that is recommended for all new MOFs structures.
On top of this, related XANES (and possibly XES) [119,144,159,160] techniques provide complementary information on the metal electronic structure to complement standard UV-Vis, EPR measurements, and ab initio calculations. In the following we focus the attention on some relevant EXAFS and XANES results appeared in the literature in the last 5 years.

Zr UiO-66, 67 and Hf UiO-66 MOFs
The recently discovered UiO-66/67/68 class of isostructural MOFs [25] has attracted great interest because of its remarkable stability at high temperatures (up to 400 C) [161], high pressures and in presence of different solvents acids and bases [26]. UiO-66 is obtained connecting Zr 6 O 4 (OH) 4 inorganic cornerstones with 1,4-benzene-dicarboxylate (BDC) as linker, while the isostructural UiO-67 material, obtained using the longer 4,4 0 biphenyl-dicarboxylate (BPDC) linker [27] (Fig. 26.1c) and Hf-UiO-66 is obtained keeping the UiO-66 linker (BDC) and substituting the Zr 6 O 4 (OH) 4 blocks with Hf 6 O 4 (OH) 4 corners [162]. Due to the rigidity of the framework several isostructural UiOs has been prepared and tested for the stability and gas adsorption. Kandiah et al. [102] studied the thermal and chemical stabilities of isostructural UiO-66-X (X ¼ NH 2 , Br, and NO 2 , see Fig. 26.2c,d) and observed the lower stability of this analogue with respect to parent UiO-66. Conversely, as documented by thermogravimetric studies UiO-67 [27] and Hf-UiO-66 [162] show thermal and chemical stability similar to that of UiO-66 and exhibit the expected surface area, as determined by low temperature volumetric N 2 adsorption isotherms. Such a high stability is related to the fact that each Zr-octahedron is 12-fold connected to adjacent octahedra. This connectivity is very common for metals, resulting in the highly packed fcc structure, but it is still almost unique in MOF topologies [25].
All MOFs are synthesized in presence of a solvent, that has to be removed to make available the large pore volume for any practical applications. The desolvation process left almost unchanged the XRPD pattern of such materials: [25,27,162] besides a gain of intensity of the basal reflections (due to the removal of the electron density inside the pores) [163,164] all peaks remains in almost the same 2θ position with small intensity changes. Conversely, a huge modification of the EXAFS spectra is obtained in all cases, see Fig.   In the three hydroxylated materials, the structure determined from the Rietveld refinement of the XRPD corresponding patterns resulted in a straightforward interpretation of the complex EXAFS signals, see first three columns in Table 26.1. The dramatic modification undergone by the EXAFS spectrum upon dehydroxylation (see Fig. 26.4) makes the data analysis not so straightforward. In the case of UiO-66 (see Fig. 26.4b, but similar effects are observed in the two other cases) the changes are basically explained in terms of three main effects: (1) small contraction of the first M-O shell accompanied by a small decrease in coordination (erosion of the shoulder around 1.9 Å); (2) relevant distortion of the second shell contribution showing a maximum that moves from 3.17 to 2.91 Å, with a shoulder at 3.41 Å, thus reflecting an important splitting of the R M1 distances of the octahedron sides; (3) the almost complete disappearance of the weak contribution around 4.7 Å, due to the M-M SS signal of the octahedron diagonal (R M2 ). For the three cases, differently to the hydroxylated cases, the 3D model obtained from the Rietveld refinement of XRPD data in the highly symmetric Fm-3m space group was inadequate to simulate the experimental datum. The origin of this failure was, obviously due to the inability of the model to account for two different R M1 and R M2 distances. For both UiO-66 [26] and UiO-67 [27] cases, the failure of the XRPD model was overcome by using the optimized geometry obtained by ab initio periodic calculations.
The inorganic cornerstones of the as synthesized materials are perfect M 6 (OH) 4 O 4 octahedron (see model in Fig. 26.5b), with 6 equivalent M at the vertex, 12 equivalent M-M1 sides and 3 equivalent and M-M2 diagonals. Upon desolvation two structural water molecules are lost per cornerstone unit (Fig. 26.5a), that evolves from M 6 (OH) 4 O 4 to M 6 O 6 [26,27,162]. The new M 6 O 6 octahedron compressed (two opposite vertexes approaching, see model in Fig. 26.5c) resulting in the shortening of 8 of the 12 edges, and the elongation of the other 4 edges. To take into account this variation the EXAFS contribution was simulated with two independently parameterized paths fixing for the degeneracy a ratio of 1/3 and 2/3 with respect to the case of the single contribution.
Summarizing, EXAFS spectroscopy allows to detect the evolution from M 6 (OH) 4 O 4 to M 6 O 6 (M ¼ Zr or Hf) of the inorganic cornerstones of UiO-66, UiO-67 and Hf-UiO-66 MOFs that escaped XRPD detection. DFT period calculations support EXAFS data. Only very recently, Øien et al. [166] succeeded in growing single crystals of UiO-66 and UiO-67 of sufficiently large size to allow synchrotron radiation single crystal data collection to be done. From such data it clearly emerges the presence of two different first shell μ 3 oxygen species, namely μ 3 O and μ 3 OH, which ZrÀO distance agreed with the previous EXAFS studies [26,27], see Table 26.1. These discrimination between first shell Zr neighbor escaped any previous XRPD analysis in all these class of materials, but was observed by EXAFS [26,27,162] and supported by IR spectroscopy.
Table 26.1 Summary of the EXAFS refinement obtained on the hydroxylated and dehydroxylated forms of UiO-66 [26], UiO-67 [27], and Hf-UiO-66 [162] UiO-66 UiO  [167][168][169][170][171], see the scheme reported in Fig. 26.6a.
In particular, the dichlorobipyrimidyl platinum(II), PtCl 2 (BPYM), performs the catalytic oxidation in fuming or concentrated sulfuric acid, achieving high yields of methanol with selectivity higher than 90 % [172,173]. It is consequently of potential interest to investigate the possibility to heterogenize such process anchoring the active Pt(II) complex on some high surface area material such as recently shown by the group of Schüth, for polymers first [174,175] and for N-doped carbons [176] successively. Øien et al. [103] have recently succeeded in functionalizing UiO-67 with PtCl 2 (H 2 BPDC) (Fig. 26.6c) or PtCl 4 (H 2 BPDC) units (Fig. 26.6b), substituting 10 % of the standard BPDC linkers. The authors used extended EXAFS and valence-to-core resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS) techniques to prove the insertion of Pt atoms in the expected framework position of UiO-67, see Fig. 26.6c.
Using EXAFS and XANES, the structural and oxidation state of Pt can be monitored under in situ conditions. The elimination of chlorine ligands from Pt in a continuous gas flow of H 2 have been monitored by EXAFS during temperature ramping, Fig. 26.7a. The spectrum collected at room temperature (black curve) exhibits both the first shell Pt-N and the Pt-Cl contributions centered around 1.5 and 1.9 Å (phase uncorrected FT) highlighted by vertical blue and green dashed lines, respectively. Upon increasing the temperature both contributions decreases in intensity because of the increased Debye-Waller factors (σ 2 N and σ 2 Cl ). Starting from about 600 K the Pt-Cl contribution shows a much more relevant decrease Reproduced with permission from Ref. [165] in temperature than the Pt-N one, suggesting that the system starts loosing chlorine ligands, leaving the MOF cavities as volatile HCl molecules. A standard EXAFS analysis failed because of the high correlation between the coordination numbers (N PtÀN ; N PtÀCl ) and the thermal parameters (σ 2 N ; σ 2 Cl ) [103]. The problem was solved performing a complex data analysis briefly summarized hereafter.  First, authors worked only on the sub-set of data in the interval between RT and 473 K. In this temperature range no bond breaking occurs so that it was possible to fix N N ¼ N Cl ¼ 2. On that sub-set they performed a parametric refinement, commonly adopted in XRPD Rietveld refinements [164,177], adopting the Einstein model for describing the temperature dependence of both σ 2 N and σ 2 Cl factors. The Einstein model approximates the vibrational density of states as a Dirac delta function spiked at a single frequency named Einstein frequency (ω E ). The model assumes that the pairs PtÀN (or PtÀCl) behaves as a quantum harmonic oscillator of mass equal to the reduced mass of the atomic pair (M ¼ 13.070 and 30.004 amu for the PtÀN and PtÀCl pairs, respectively). Under such assumptions, the σ 2 (T ) behavior is straightforwardly determined by the only ω E parameter according to the Eq. (26.1): [103,178]  This approach allowed the authors to reduce the number of parameters used to optimize the thermal factors of the series from ~40 to only two, Θ E (PtÀN) and Θ E (PtÀCl), with a consequent reduction of the correlation among the optimized parameters and thus a reduction of the relative error bars. Once obtained the Einstein temperatures Θ E (PtÀN) and Θ E (PtÀCl), the dependence of both σ 2 N and σ 2 Cl vs. T was straightforwardly obtained via Eq. ( 26.1) and extrapolated on the whole set of data (i.e., also above 473 C). This strategy allowed to have stable fits on the whole temperature range while optimizing both N N and N Cl , as shown in Fig. 26.7b. From this data analysis, it is evident that both N N and N Cl are stable to the stoichiometric values of 2.0 up to 575 K, when they start to decrease together. However, while N Cl decreases almost linearly to 0.4 at 750 K, N N undergoes a fast decrease to 1.6 at 610 K and then remains almost stable, reaching the value of 1.4 at 750 K. This means that a prolonged activation in H 2 of the UiO-67-Pt(II) MOF in the 610-640 K interval will result in a minimal loss of Pt(II), that will lose the PtÀN connection with the framework, but in the break of an important fraction of the PtÀCl bonds. The experiment reported in Fig. 26.7 proved that this activation temperature interval is ideal to obtain a material where most of the functionalized Pt(II) species are still linked to the MOF framework, exhibiting the coordination vacancies needed to make the UiO-67-Pt(II) material a potential heterogeneous catalyst [103]. The presence of coordination vacancies at platinum sites was directly testified by IR spectroscopy of adsorbed CO.
EXAFS also provided evidence of the liquid phase ligand exchange with toluene-3,4-dithiol (H 2 tdt) and of the liquid phase oxidative addition of Br 2 to Pt, see Also the XANES part of the XAS spectrum Fig. 26.9a is sensitive to the changes undergone by the local environment of Pt(II) along the chemical reactions reported in Fig. 26.8d. Indeed, upon change in the Pt oxidation state, Pt L 3 -edge XANES will show a very small edge shift while exhibit a noticeable variation of the intensity of the "white-line" peak [103,179,180]. Indeed, the XANES part of the Pt L 3 -edge mainly promotes core 2p 3/2 electrons into empty 5d 3/2 , 5d 5/2 , and 6s valence states, so mainly probing the unoccupied density of 5d-states and partially 6s-states. The formal electronic configuration of platinum depends on its oxidation state as follows: Pt 0 (6s 1 5d 9 ), Pt II (6s 0 5d 8 ), and Pt IV (6s 0 5d 6 ); consequently an increase of the Pt oxidation states results in an higher density of unoccupied 5d states (and 6s) that is directly measured by an increase in the intensity of Pt L 3 -edge. The XANES spectra reported in Fig. 26.9a for UiO-67-Pt(II) MOF before (red line) and after interaction with H 2 tdt (blue line) and Br 2 (green line) clearly follow this quantitative, phenomenological guiding line. Interaction with H 2 tdt (blue spectrum in Fig. 26.9a) does not change the white line intensity, affecting only the post edge and EXAFS region of the spectrum; on these basis it was concluded that a ligand exchange reaction occurred. Conversely interaction with Br 2 (green spectrum in Fig. 26.9a) results in a significant increase in the white line intensity, testifying an oxidation process from Pt(II) to Pt(IV) [103].  [25,27]. Adapted by permission of the American Chemical Society (copyright 2015) from Ref. [103] On a more quantitative ground, the simulation of the XANES spectra, performed with quantum chemistry molecular orbital approach implemented in ADF code on the H 2 bpydcPtCl 2 , H 2 bpydcPt-tdt, and H 2 bpydcPtBr 4 molecular fragments (Fig. 26.9b), was able to reproduce correctly the variation of the white line intensity, and post edge features [181].

Interaction of NH 3 with Cu 2+ Sites in HKUST-1
HKUST-1, also known as Cu 3 (BTC) 2 , is a Cu(II) based fcc-MOF characterized by a 3D system of square-shaped pores (9 Å Â 9 Å) [182]. In Cu 3 (BTC) 2 Cu 2+ ions form dimers, where each copper atom is coordinated to four oxygen atoms, coming from the benzene-1,3,5 tricarboxylate (BTC) linkers ([Cu 2 C 4 O 8 ] cage) and one water molecule adsorbed on each Cu 2+ site [55,155,183]. A schematic representation of the Cu 3 (BTC) 2 buildings blocks and how they are connected to give rise to the threedimensional structure is reported in Fig. 26.10a (see also Fig. 26.1b). The EXAFS study of Prestipino et al. [155] showed that water molecules can be removed from the first coordination shell of Cu 2+ without loss of crystallinity and porosity. This property is extremely important, as it implies the formation of coordinatively unsaturated Cu 2+ sites that become consequently available for additional ligands such as molecules dosed from the gas phase (Fig. 26  (2.31 AE 0.01) Å (while water coordinates at (2.24 AE 0.03) Å) and causes an impressive expansion of the Cu 2+ -Cu 2+ distance up to (2.80 AE 0.03) Å, see Table 26
Of interest is also the XANES study reported by Borfecchia et al. [158] and here summarized in Fig. 26.11. Part (a) reports the experimental XANES spectra of HKUST-1 as-prepared (hydrated sample, blue solid line), after activation at 453 K (dehydrated sample, pink solid line) and upon contact with 60 mbar of ammonia at room temperature (green solid line). The XANES spectra of the as prepared and  dehydrated sample are typical of Cu(II) species, showing the edge jump at 8990 eV and two characteristic pre-edge peaks at ca. 8976 eV and ca. 8986 eV, labeled as ( 1) and ( 2), respectively, in Fig. 26.11a, and separately reported in the insets of the same part. Feature ( 1) is assigned to the very weak 1s ! 3d quadrupolar transition, while the shoulder (2) appearing along the white line profile is related to the dipolar shakedown 1s ! 4p transition. XANES spectra reported in Fig. 26.11b were simulated using FEFF8.4 code [133]. For the hydrated version of HKUST-1 (blue spectrum) the authors adopted as input geometry the structure optimized in the single crystal XRD study of Chui et al. [182] and cutting a cluster centered on one of the Cu atoms with a radius of 6 Å around it. For a further improvement of the simulations, an optimization of geometrical parameters was performed exploiting FitIt software [184] and optimizing five structural parameters: (1) the Cu-Cu and (2) Cu-H 2 O bond length, the distance between the Cu atom and the BTC carboxyl groups with a separate optimization of (3) Cu-O1 and of (4) Cu-C and Cu-O 2 distances (optimized in a correlated way to use only one free parameter) and ( 5) a general overall contraction or elongation of all the other distances (R XANES ¼ α R XRD ) [126,185]. See Fig. 26.10c for the atom notation. It has been observed that a variation of Cu-Cu distance reflected in very slight changes in the XANES features, the Cu-H 2 O distance influences the intensity and partially the position in energy of the pre-edge feature (2), the carbonyl groups distances and a possible overall contraction or expansion strongly influence both the intensity and the position of the white line and the shape of the multiple scattering features at higher energies [158].
The simulation of the dehydrated sample was obtained removing the water molecules from the previous cluster, while for the sample in interaction with ammonia the H 2 O molecules were substituted by two NH 3 ones [158]. In the case of the hydrated sample, the best agreement between the simulated curve and experimental data was obtained with a slight shortening of Cu-H 2 O distance, an elongation of 0.05 Å of both Cu-O1 and the constrained Cu-C and Cu-O 2 distances, corresponding to a shift along the bond axis of the carbonyl groups and a slight general contraction of all other distances. Upon water removal, no shift in the absorption edge is observed, providing an evidence that no change in oxidation state of the Cu center occurs. However, the XANES spectrum of the dehydrated sample shows: (1) a decrease of the white line intensity, and (2) an increase in the intensity of feature ( 2), that appears more as a well separated band than as a white line shoulder. The simulation of the XANES spectrum for the activated sample was performed with the same method previously described for the hydrated sample removing the atoms of the two water molecules, resulting in an optimization with four parameters only. Even without a structural optimization, in the simulated spectra it has been observed the same trend noticed on the experimental curves where the decrease of the white line intensity is correlated to the lower coordination number, and the increase of the intensity of feature ( 2) is ascribable to a lower symmetry of the Cu(II) species. The authors concluded that in the simulated curves this trend is less evident probably because a full description of the asymmetric distortion undergone by the Cu species in the activated sample would require a too high number of parameters to be optimized. The optimization of the bond distances resulted in a slight contraction of the distances between the absorbing Cu atom and carbonyl groups and all other distances, in agreement with the results found by EXAFS study (see Fig. 26.10 and Table 26.2). The XANES spectrum of the activated sample after the interaction with NH 3 evidences an additional increase in the intensity and a slight blue-shift of the dipole band (2) assigned to the 1s ! 4p transition [158]. Moreover, a new pre-edge peak is observed at ca. 8983 eV. Despite the edge position is not modified respect to the as prepared and activated samples (no change in oxidation state of the metal), the white line is modified towards a more structured appearance, and seems to return towards the shape observed in the case of the hydrated sample. The simulation of the spectrum for the sample after interaction with NH 3 was performed following the same method adopted for the hydrated material and substituting the water molecules with two NH 3 molecules. After the optimization of the geometrical parameters it has been observed that an increasing of the intensity of the pre-edge feature (2) is proportional to the Cu-NH 3 distance which was optimized at 2.3 Å with a considerable elongation with respect to the previous position of the water molecules. Moreover a splitting of the white line feature, even if less evident with respect to the experimental spectra, has been observed after a distortion of carbonyl groups simulated by a slight elongation of Cu-O1 distances but a severe shortening of both Cu-C and Cu-O 2 and all other distances. The authors concluded that that the deformation introduced to simulate the XANES spectra is in agreement with the results of the EXAFS fit [158].

Discrimination Between Phosphine and Phosphine
Oxide Groups in P-MOFs by P K-Edge XAS Phosphine metal-organic frameworks (P-MOFs) are crystalline porous coordination polymers that contain phosphorus functional groups within their pores [186][187][188][189][190][191]. Incorporation of phosphine functional groups inside structures with new and existing topologies is achieved using direct solvothermal synthesis, postsynthetic modification [192] or the co-crystallization of organic linkers with similar connectivity [193]. Interesting applications for this new class of materials have been foreseen in transition metal immobilization and catalysis [187,194]. Very recently Morel et al. [191] used soft-X-ray P-K-edge XAS to determine the phosphine to phosphine oxide ratio in two P-MOFs with MIL-101 topology, whose structure is described in Fig. 26.12c. This achievement is of particular relevance as the phosphorus oxidation state is of particular interest as the phosphine to phosphine oxide ratio influences the coordination affinity of P-MOFs for transition metals. Differently to solid state NMR spectroscopy, P-K-edge XAS can determine the oxidation state of phosphorus even when the material contains paramagnetic nuclei.
The P K-edge XAS spectra of PPh 2 -BDC and POPh 2 -BDC linkers, see Fig. 26.12a red and blue spectra respectively, provide a spectral reference for the characterization of the two P-MOFs. A blue shift in the white line from 2147.3 to 2150.6 eV is observed upon oxidation of the phosphorus nuclei, compare the pre-edge resonances (A I and B I in Fig. 26.12a), that are attributed to the effect of phenyl groups in the higher coordination shells of the phosphorus [195]. The spectrum of PPh 2 -BDC exhibits a more pronounced pre-edge feature relative to its white line, compared to that of the POPh 2 -BDC linker. Spectral features are not affected equally by the presence of an oxygen atom, with a 2.2 eV shift for A I to B I features compared to a 3.3 eV for the A to B white lines. PPh 2 -BDC displayed an additional spectral feature A II at an energy very close to that of the white line of POPh 2 -BDC (2150.3 eV) and indicates partial oxidation of the sample in agreement with a parallel 31 P NMR investigation [191].
The P K-edge XANES spectra of LSK-15 and LSK-12 P-MOFs are reported in Fig. 26.12b, orange and cyan spectra, respectively. The former P-MOF is characterized by a complex XANES spectrum defined by five different absorption features (C to C IV ), which testifies the presence of multiple phosphorus oxidation states. As for PPh 2 -BDC linker, LSK-15 displayed features related to the white lines of triarylphosphine (C) and triarylphosphine oxide (C II ) at 2145.7 and 2150.2 eV, respectively. The relative intensity of C II to C ratio is higher in LSK-15 than in the corresponding A II to A ratio in the organic linker PPh 2 -BDC providing proof of phosphorus oxidation inside this MOF. The pre-edge feature C I is attributed to the characteristic resonance of phosphine environment in PPh 2 -BDC. The XANES spectrum of LSK-12 displays fewer features than LSK-15 (D to D III ). Comparison based solely on the absorption edge positions of the two organic linkers is difficult due to a perceived overlap between A and B I , which could both be contributors to the D I feature. However, the absence of the corresponding A I pre-edge feature in LSK-12, and to a lesser extent the small edge shift between C and D I , are indicative of phosphine oxide as the primary phosphorus species in LSK-12. The relative intensities of the white line D and the pre-edge feature D I also compare well with the POPh 2 -BDC organic linker. Finally, Morel et al. [191] reproducing the XANES spectrum of the P-MOF samples with a linear combination of the spectra of the linkers concluded that phosphine accounts for about 70 % of the total phosphorus groups in LSK-15 and that LSK-12 contains only phosphine oxide, see Fig. 26.12b.

Optimized Finite Difference Method for the Full-Potential XANES Simulations: Application to Molecular Adsorption Geometries in MOFs
Over the past two decades much progress has been made in the understanding the features of the XANES region of the X-ray absorption spectra [133,134,[137][138][139][140][141][196][197][198][199][200][201][202][203][204][205].
As already outlined at the end of Sect. 26.3.3 (see Fig. 26.11 and related discussion) appearance of progressively more sophisticated codes, together with the increased computational capabilities, has made XANES a spectroscopy able to quantitatively confirm or discard a structural model for the environment of the X-ray absorbing atom, forming thus a new fundamental diagnostic tool in condensed matter physics and chemistry [119,148,149,206]. Besides the multiple scattering approach (used for example by FEFF [133], XKDQ [207], CONTIN-UUM [208,209], MXAN [138,139] codes), the finite difference method (FDM) [140,141,205] is attractive for calculations of the photoelectron wave function up to 100À200 eV above the absorption edge avoiding, in a simple way, the muffin tin approximation used in the multiple scattering theory approaches. In the muffin tin approximation, the potential is assumed to be spherical inside the touching (or overlapping) atomic spheres and constant between them [134]. The main drawback of the XANES simulation in the FDM approach is the heavy computational time and the huge RAM required to store the computed values. Very recently, due to the use of dedicated solvers for sparse matrices, Guda et al. [141] succeeded in reducing by more than one order of magnitude the required CPU time and in halving the needed RAM required by the standard Gaussian method previously used by the FDMNES code [140]. The potentialities of this improved version of the FDMNES code are hereafter discussed using as example the Ni K-edge XANES spectra of CPO-27-Ni MOF and its modification upon molecular adsorption on the Ni site.
CPO-27-Ni MOF [122] contains one-dimensional channels which are filled with water that can be removed by a mild thermal treatment. Upon dehydration the crystalline structure is preserved and a material with a high surface area containing unsaturated metal sites organized in helicoidal chains is obtained [126], see above Fig. 26.3d. In its dehydrated form the first coordination of Ni 2+ atoms consists into five framework oxygen atoms in a square planar pyramidal-like configuration, leaving one coordination vacancy free for adsorbate coordination adsorbate molecules such as: CO [125], H 2 O [126], NO [126], N 2 [123], C 2 H 4 [123], H 2 S [210]. As shown above in Fig. 26.3c, the adsorption of a molecule into the coordination vacancy of Ni 2+ causes weak, but significant, changes in the Ni K-edge XANES spectrum of CPO-27-Ni. As just outlined, the XANES simulation in the FDM approach is CPU time consuming. Indeed, a large cluster must be cut around the Ni atom that undergoes the photoelectric effect before reaching convergence of the XANES calculations. This fact is clearly shown in Figure 26.13a showing that the simulated XANES spectrum of the dehydrated form of CPO-27-Ni changes significantly moving from a cluster cut R ¼ 3 Å to one cut at R ¼ 5 Å. This fact is even more evident in Figure 26.13b where the difference spectra are shown:
Unfortunately, the CPU needed to perform the XANES simulation scales approximatively with an exponential function of the cluster size, as shown by the scattered squares reported in the inset of Figure 26.13a, that are almost linear in a logarithmic ordinate scale. This means that the simulation on the R ¼ 7 Å cluster is 44 times more demanding than that on the R ¼ 4 cluster; moreover it requires 14 times more RAM memory (data not reported in the inset). The accelerated version of the FDMNES code [141] reduces significantly the requested CPU time for the same calculations; see scattered triangles in the inset of Figure 26.13a. Of particular interest is the fact that the speed-up of the calculations (defined as the ratio between the CPU time needed in to perform a given calculation in the standard code divided by the time needed for the same calculation with the accelerated version of the code) scales favorably with the increasing cluster size: with some fluctuations it moves from 14 to 38 moving from the R ¼ 4 Å cluster to the R ¼ 7 Å one (see the numbers reported close to the vertical arrows in the inset).
The gain of a factor larger than one order of magnitude (up to forty for the large clusters relevant to obtain a meaningful simulation) makes it possible to perform structural determination from a detailed XANES study. To prove this concept we show that it is possible form the simulation of the XANES spectra to determine the geometry of the molecular complex formed upon adsorption of a diatomic ligand molecule (NO or CO) on the coordination vacancy of Ni 2+ sites in the dehydrated form of CPO-27-Ni MOF. As the spectroscopic difference between the XANES spectra collected before and after molecular adsorption are not very large (see for example the case of N 2 adsorption reported in Fig. 26.3c), they are better appreciated by reporting the difference spectra Δμ exp ¼ μ exp (+NO) À μ exp (dehyd), as done in the scattered dots spectrum reported in Fig. 26.14a, for the case of NO adsorption. Also reported (red curve) is the analogous difference spectrum obtained from the simulations: Δμ theo,θ ¼ μ theo,θ (+NO) À μ theo (dehyd). As shown in Fig. 26.14b, μ theo,θ (+NO), an thus Δμ theo,θ (+NO), depends on the The simulations reported in Fig. 26.14b clearly indicate that it is possible to determine the adsorption angle θ by an appropriate comparison between the experimental Δμ and the theoretical ones computed for different θ angles. The red squares in Fig. 26.15 reports the integrated difference over all the sampled points of |Δμ exp (E i ) À Δμ theo,θ (E i )| in the 8325-8440 eV interval plotted versus the adsorption angle θ used in the simulations. From the results it is evident that the linear geometry is not favored and that the XANES simulations predict a bent geometry for the NiÁÁÁNO adducts with a θ angle in the 90-140 range. Conversely, for the CO adsorption (scattered black circles in Fig. 26.15) the linear geometry (θ ~180 ) is clearly favored. These results are in agreement with the periodic DFT calculation performed by Valenzano et al. [124] where the optimized structures were characterized by adsorption angles of NiÀNÀO ¼ 123 and of NiÀCÀO ¼ 171 , while the fitting of the EXAFS data resulted in good agreement with the experimental data by fixing the adsorption angles to NiÀNÀO ¼ 130 and of NiÀCÀO ¼ 180 [125,126].

Conclusions
In this chapter, we introduce MOFs as the new class of crystalline porous materials of remarkable potentialities. We underline the flexibility in the realization of different MOFs and the fact that they are ideal materials for performing X-ray absorption experiments at the metal K or L 3 edges in transmission mode. A selection of relevant results appearing in the last five years follows, underlying the relevant role of both EXAFS and XANES in determining the structural and electronic configuration of metals centers inside MOFs.
(1) XAFS provides local structural information independent of the long-range order. Consequently, evolution of the local structure of molecular complexes or clusters that actively participate in homogeneous catalysis can be monitored with ease. (2) XAFS is an element-specific technique. Tuning the X-ray energy to the absorption edge focuses solely on a particular element or metal center of interest and thereby allows study of the catalyst's unique role in the reaction. An additional advantage of this element specificity is that other structural correlations, which arise from spectator entities (e.g., passive solvents), are inherently filtered out. (3) Most catalysts have X-ray absorption edges (one or more) that can be excited using an energy-tunable X-ray source (normally using a spectroscopy beamline at a synchrotron). X-ray energies involved in these measurements are usually sufficiently high that the X-rays readily penetrate the samples and windows in the reaction cell. Most importantly, this enables the measurement to be performed operando-under true reaction conditions. A key to performing such measurements, as will be discussed later, lies in the design and use of appropriate reactors or operando cells. (4) XAFS is highly sensitive to dilute catalysts when measurements are performed using fluorescence detection. This makes it a powerful technique to probe dilute constituents that potentially play important catalytic roles. ( 5) Careful analysis of absorption edge position and of near edge (XANES) features provides key information on various electronic aspects, such as oxidation state and site symmetry of the probed element. ( 6) Detailed analysis of the extended X-ray absorption spectra (EXAFS) quantitatively probes the structural coordination chemistry by elucidating both the local-and medium-range molecular structure around the probed element. In addition, information on the ligand symmetry of the first shell or the structure of collinear chains of atoms, such as metal carbonyls, can often be extracted by a careful analysis that includes multiple scattering processes [1][2][3][4][5][6][7]. This is a unique trait of XAFS that allows one to extract many-body correlations. (7) XAFS allows a direct quantitative analysis of the amount of the catalyst species that is dissolved in solution. This is particularly important when a metal catalyst is thought to be precipitating during the reaction. By altering the cell position with respect to the beam, while under operando conditions, the X-ray beam can probe the catalyst-containing precipitate, thereby also giving a direct analysis of the insoluble components.
In the sections that follow, the objective is to illustrate the power of the XAFS technique and to provide examples of how it has been applied to homogeneous systems in order to gain deep insight into the function of the catalyst. The examples include metal centers having either single-atom species or metal clusters that contain up to four atoms in the core. The overall subject in this chapter deals with homogeneous catalysis, although there is not a well-defined cutoff differentiating a homogeneous cluster from a nanoparticle, rather there is a continuum of sizes that can be chemically relevant. This chapter is not an exhaustive review of the literature, but it is intended to illustrate the power of XAFS spectroscopy in the study of homogeneous catalysis. Several recent examples of homogeneous catalysis are highlighted, including themes of green chemistry, hydrogen storage, and classical hydrogenation chemistry where XAFS has been used to provide completely new understanding of the underlying mechanisms.

There are Limitations
The method of operando XAFS is used to track the change in the metal center environment, starting with the precursor species and following the chemical conversion to the dominant species that is present under reaction conditions. There is a common misconception that XAFS captures the "active" form of the catalyst during the chemical reaction. In special circumstances, operando methods may query the active state, but more often than not, it queries a resting catalyst state or an equilibrium of different catalyst states. Thus a short-lived transition state that is the true active catalyst might not be detected in a standard XAFS experiment. This is of course true of most spectroscopic techniques. There is also the possibility that the active species is a trace component in equilibrium with a dominant, major inactive state. This situation is exemplified by palladium catalyzed C-C bond formation reactions, such as the Mizoroki-Heck reaction [8], where the active catalyst is present at the ppm levels [9][10][11].
Even with these limitations, XAFS is among the best existing methods to probe the catalyst in a state as close as possible to its active state. In this regard, if at all possible, the chemistry should be formulated in a series of steps to trap or favor the intermediate states. In addition, one should not overlook the often important, complimentary information that is available from other spectroscopic methods such as NMR, IR, Raman spectroscopy, or other chemical techniques such as careful kinetics or poisoning studies. Finally, critical insights can be gained using a parallel effort involving DFT-based molecular structure calculations. An especially powerful approach is the direct computation of an XAFS spectrum (MD-XAFS) from a molecular dynamics trajectory (see Chap. 18 in this volume) that can be used to make quantitative comparisons to the experimental spectrum. Thus operando XAFS probes the catalyst state in a way that is directly relevant to molecular simulation.

Literature Highlights
Since the advent of modern XAFS [12][13][14], it has been an important tool to investigate heterogeneous catalyst systems. Several authoritative review articles dealing with XAFS and heterogeneous catalysis can be found in literature [15,16]. In contrast to heterogeneous catalysis, the use of XAFS to understand homogeneous systems is somewhat more limited; however, studies of homogeneous catalysis can be found in the literature in addition to a few recent reviews [16][17][18]. We highlight a few XAFS studies of homogeneous systems as representative examples.
Some homogeneous metal catalysts function with high activity when they are present in ultra-low concentrations. Taking advantage of the sensitivity of XAFS to dilute species, Fiddy et al. [9,19] have elucidated the structure of palladium species involved in Mizoroki-Heck chemistry-with studies of concentrations down to industrially relevant dilute limits (50 to 2 ppm). The study revealed that at high dilution the catalyst consists largely of monomeric species but that it evolves in an equilibrium with dimeric species as the concentration or temperature is increased. In some instances the increased presence of "inactive" dimers is implicated for the low turnover rate with increasing palladium concentration.
In an early energy-dispersive XAFS (ED-XAFS) study, Bogg et al. [20] obtained time resolved spectra (time resolution: ~15 s) of a nickel catalyst used for alkene oligomerization. They showed that a rapid equilibrium develops during the reaction, which entails alkyl transfer between the promoter (Al) and the precursor metals (Ni). The study showed that reversible transmetalation processes are of central importance to the mechanism of catalysis in this system.
Using a purpose-built freeze-quench attachment in conjunction with the more conventional stopped-flow methods, Barlett et al. [21] studied a molybdenum-based catalyst to gain insight into the mechanism of selective oligomerization of alkenes. In this study, the development of a freeze-quench apparatus allowed trapping of intermediates within 1 s of mixing. Subsequent fluorescence XAFS studies of the frozen samples along with complementary quick-XAFS (QXAFS) time resolved measurements (time resolution: ~20 s) shed light on the catalytic activity and deactivation pathways of this system.
Multimodal approaches, that combine XAFS with other complementary techniques (FT-IR, Raman, UV-Vis, time resolved XRD, and so on), are increasingly being used for operando studies. A multimodal approach can potentially provide a more holistic and complete understanding of the catalytic process. In this context, an elegant combined ED-XAFS/UV-Vis study was performed by Diaz-Moreno et al. [22] to monitor the structural evolution of the inner-sphere electron transfer reaction between [IrCl 6 ] 2À and [Co(CN) 5 ] 3À . Time resolved XAFS spectra at the Ir L 3 -edge suggest that the electron transfer leads to the formation of a bridged Ir (III) intermediate in a time scale much faster than the experimental time resolution of 200 ms. Using the information obtained from the simultaneously recorded UV-Vis spectra, they also estimate that the proportion of this reaction intermediate reaches 90 % at approximately 200 ms after initiation of the reaction. Similarly, Guilera et al. [23] combined UV-Vis and ED-XAFS to obtain simultaneous structuralkinetic information on a homogeneous palladium catalyst. This study allowed the verification of the structural details of the oxidative addition (PhI onto [(PPh 3 ) 2 Pd (dba)]) and the subsequent isomerization reaction. Notably, XAFS is sensitive to both the local structure and changes in oxidation state of Pd, while UV-Vis is sensitive to loss of dba ligands and the isomerization. Additionally, in both of the above studies, the kinetics of the reaction was simultaneously obtained-without the need to infer the kinetics from separately conducted studies. In another study, Tromp et al. [24] have used NMR, EPR, ED-XAFS, and UV-Vis to study the arylation reaction of imidazole, catalyzed by commercially important [Cu(OH) (TMEDA)] 2 Cl 2 precursor. The ED-XAFS and UV-Vis studies were performed simultaneously in a multimodal fashion. Careful analysis of the time resolved XANES and the EXAFS spectra, combined with judicious use of the other complementary spectroscopic techniques, provide detailed insights into the complex evolution of the catalyst structure and the nature of the intermediates formed during the reaction. It is clear from the above discussions that multimodal approaches can provide important insights. Even more involved approaches with simultaneous use of three different techniques (e.g., XAFS, Raman, and UV-Vis), and the use of other advanced X-ray spectroscopy methods are currently being developed [25,26]. In the authors' opinion an important future direction would be the combination of XAFS with NMR so that both XAFS and NMR spectra could be simultaneously obtained while under operando conditions.
The role of nanoparticulate gold as an efficient catalyst in many electrocatalytic and heterogeneous catalytic systems has been widely studied using XAFS. In a recent study, Hashmi et al. [27], explored whether or not gold complexes could be used as homogeneous catalysts for oxidative reactions. Specifically, using in situ XAFS, they showed unequivocally that mononuclear gold complexes can indeed catalyze the direct conversion of aldehydes and alcohols to esters. However, deactivation of the catalyst did occur and sometimes "inactive" small gold particles were detected.
More recently, Sherborne et al. [28] have exploited the ability of XAFS to characterize a sample from multiple X-ray absorber (Ir, Cl, and K) viewpoints, to understand the activation and deactivation mechanisms of an Ir-based homogenous transfer hydrogenation catalyst, [Cp*IrCl 2 ] 2 . They observed that the active precatalyst is generated by ligand exchange, namely, exchange of one chloride ligand with an alkoxide. The exchange of an additional chloride ligand leads to the formation of complex potassium alkoxide-iridate species, which are implicated in the deactivation of the catalyst.

Experimental Methods

Methods of XAFS Acquisition for Homogeneous Reactions
The choice of method and mode of XAFS data collection [29] depends primarily on the kinetics of the homogeneous reaction and on the concentration of the probed metal center. Various XAFS methods can be used to probe many decades of time scales from a few picoseconds up to many hours. For systems with moderate catalyst concentrations, the most common approach is the use of conventional, transmission XAFS data collection with the monochromator scanned in a step-by-step, discrete scanning mode. In such setups, a single XAFS spectrum can be obtained in 1-20 min. The time required for a scan depends, among other things, on the choice of integration time used per energy step, total number of acquired data points, and dead times associated with monochromator movement and detector settling. This classic XAFS method allows one to study dynamics that occur in the few tens of minutes to hours. However, if measurement of dynamics in the sub-minute to few minutes time scale is required a much faster data acquisition rate is needed. This can be accomplished using the Quick XAFS (QXAFS) method [30][31][32][33] in which the monochromator is driven in a continuous fashion (using a cam-drive or piezo tuning) along with a simultaneous (on-the-fly) read-out of the detectors. This method also allows for the measurement of absorption data during movement of the monochromator in both forward (increasing energy) or backward (decreasing energy) directions. Typical times taken per scan are in the range of seconds (0.1-few seconds). A comparable technique with similar time-resolution is the use of an energy dispersive approach (ED-XAFS) [34][35][36]. In this approach, non-monochromatic X-rays are diffracted-either in a Bragg (reflection) or Laue (transmission) geometry-and focused to a uniform spot on the sample, using a long, bent "polychromator" crystal.
The focused beam, on transiting the sample, is allowed to diverge onto a position sensitive detector (PSD) where the beam position on the PSD is correlated to energy. This dispersive arrangement affords the collection of the entire absorption spectrum simultaneously; therefore, time resolution in the few milliseconds to sub-second range can be easily achieved. Such experiments are limited, however, to transmission mode geometry and further require highly uniform and concentrated samples. For dilute species, transmission mode methods may not provide sufficient sensitivity, and the use of fluorescence detection is often warranted [29]. A variety of fluorescence detector options can be employed such as a Lytle detector with a Stern-Heald-Soller slit assembly, a multi-element energy dispersive detector, or a crystal optics system. Both XAFS and QXAFS methods can be adapted to fluorescence detection where the time required to get a good quality scan will depend on the exact counting statistics of the experiment. Finally, although not yet widely employed in homogeneous catalysis, the coupling to the time structure of the synchrotron radiation using pump-probe methods enables studies of ultrafast phenomena in the sub-picosecond to tens of picosecond time scale [37]. Such timing modes hold great promise in studying intermediate, transitory species, and can potentially shed light on diverse processes; e.g., redox chemistry, charge transfer phenomena, and making or breaking of bonds during chemical reactions.

Reaction Cells
A molecularly dispersed, homogeneous catalyst in a chemical reactor that incorporates X-ray transparent windows provides nearly the ideal sample configuration and uniformity for XAFS spectroscopy. There are many aspects involved in selecting the ideal XAFS cell. Many beamlines provide reaction cells that are appropriate for certain classes of systems. However, in order to most efficiently use the allotted beamtime, it is often preferable to build a small XAFS reactor that has been optimized for a particular edge-energy, catalyst concentration, beam properties, and other aspects of the reaction system. X-ray transparent windows and reactor body materials are selected based upon their chemical inertness, the required X-ray energies, and the pressure and temperature of the system. The most common window types include polyimide (Kapton) films (25-150 μm), polyether ether ketone (PEEK) in sheet or machined forms (0.5-5 mm), single crystal or polycrystalline diamond (15 μm-1 mm), glassy carbon (0.5-3 mm), and silicon nitride (50 nm-1 μm). At high energies even amorphous materials such as silicate glasses are appropriate. Glassy carbon is an excellent material, since the amorphous structure does not add diffraction artifacts to the XAFS spectra. Glassy carbon is appropriate for moderate pressures, high temperatures and is inert under most solvent conditions [38]. The extreme inertness of diamond makes it the favored window materials for the most chemically aggressive systems at high pressure. Thin single-crystal diamonds work well at lower energies where there are limited numbers of interfering Bragg peaks. At higher energies, polycrystalline diamond windows may be used, but they may require subtraction of a background spectrum to remove weak contributions from sets of broadened Bragg peak groupings [39]. The reactor body is selected based upon the compatibility with the reaction solutionnamely, the reactor body should be of a benign material that does not interfere or poison the catalytic process and should be corrosion resistant. They are usually constructed from polymers, glasses, or a wide variety of different metal alloys including stainless steel, titanium, and precious metals. Figure 27.1 shows three different types of reaction cells with designs that span the range from simple to complex. In Fig. 27.1a, a glass sample vial has been used to study a rhodium-based dehydrogenation catalyst [40] in which a small modification incorporates an outlet tube allowing for the monitoring of hydrogen production. At 23 keV (Rh K-edge) the beam is easily transmitted through the glass vial base, the solvent and polyseal cap of this reactor. Figure 27.1b illustrates the other extreme of a much more complex design [41,42] that is required for hightemperature (400 C) and high pressure water studies (600 bar). This cell has been used to study the structure of a MnBr 2 catalyst for the oxidation of p-xylene in supercritical water. Finally, Fig. 27.1c illustrates a high-pressure hydrogenation cell [43] using a slightly modified commercial pressure fitting (HIP Inc) altered to accept a set of PEEK X-ray windows. A small magnetic stir bar is used to keep the lower liquid phase saturated with H 2 during the batch hydrogenation reaction.
Perhaps most importantly, comments are given on methods to most efficiently use the expensive and precious resource, that is, the allocated beamtime. There are several strategies that help lead to the best possible outcome while studying the catalyst chemistry at a beamtime. These include: (1) Bring a full range of catalyst and reactant chemistry to the beamline. During the beamtime, as much as possible, make initial structural evaluations from the XAFS spectra as they are being acquired. This allows for adjustments to the experimental plan to accommodate unexpected findings. (2) Develop a complete and detailed test plan and review the plan with the beamline scientists beforehand. Plan more experiments than the time allows, readjusting the agenda to cover failed experiments. Test the chemistry in the XAFS cell before arrival. Make sure that your trip to the beamline is fully staffed.
(3) Measure all structurally related standards (typically > 6) that play an important role in interpretation of the XAFS spectra (4) Discuss the overall experimental plan with beamline personnel well ahead of scheduled beamtime in order to make sure that all aspects of the reaction can be operated safely under the constraints of operation in a beamline hutch and the beamline laboratory.  A new, more efficient synthesis route involves the use of high-temperature water as a green solvent [44][45][46]. Another primary benefit is that this approach eliminates the formation of an undesirable side product (4-carboxybenzaldehyde) that is costly to remove. An active catalyst for this reaction is MnBr 2 , which operates in supercritical water at 400 C and 300 bar. In situ XAFS (rather than operando in this case) has been used to probe the catalyst structure at reaction conditions to determine the mechanism of this reaction [42]. The extreme demands of this type of system, in terms of high temperature, high pressure and corrosive environment, require a specialized cell. A design similar to the one illustrated in Fig. 27.1b was employed for these studies [41]. The essential features include the use of polycrystalline diamond, X-ray windows that are affixed to a corrosion-resistant titanium alloy body. Under ambient conditions, the Mn 2+ is fully hydrated with six water molecules in an octahedral symmetry. In contrast, as shown in Fig. 27.2b, the local structure about Mn 2+ undergoes a dramatic transition to the catalytic species that exists at 400 C. The Mn 2+ first-shell coordination structure now includes 3 Br À anions that form a contact ion pair with the cation. As shown in Fig. 27.2c, through the acquisition of both Mn and Br K-edge XAFS spectra, a clear picture of the structural details emerge. The simultaneous refinement of these two sets of spectra imposes strong constraints on the fitted Mn-Br bond distance, disorder, and coordination numbers, as these are shared parameters in the refined fits (shown in Fig. 27.2c). The full characterization of the Mn and Br states helps explain why this catalyst is so active under these conditions. It is suggested that the formation of contact-ion pairs aids in the Br• free radical formation process via charge transfer with Mn 2+ /Mn 3+ in the contact ion pair. The bromine radical, Br•, rapidly and selectively generates the benzylic radical that initiates the chain reaction with oxygen. (2Àn) Polyanions in Ionic Liquids for Conversion of Fructose to Hydroxymethylfurfural Ionic liquids are of high interest because of their potential role as solvents for green chemistry. In general, ionic liquids have an extremely low vapor pressure that simplifies the recovery of the reactants and products. In addition, the unusual solvent environment may enhance certain homogeneous catalytic processes. Cu 2+ is one of several transition metals in ionic liquids that efficiently converts fructose to hydroxymethylfurfural, an important chemical intermediate [47]. In addition, Cu 2+ is active in the depolymerization of cellulose [48]. For these reasons, XAFS has been used [49] to measure changes in the coordination structure of Cu 2+ in the ionic liquid, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride or [EMIM]Cl, a chemical system that is dominated by Cu 2+ ion pairing with multiple Cl À anions. The low dielectric constant of the ionic liquids and the lack of an extended water hydrogenbonding network leads to extensive formation of Cu 2+ -Cl À contact ion pairs due to the lack of charge screening between the cation and anion.

Examples of Homogeneous Catalytic Systems

CuCl n
Water is often an impurity or product in ionic liquid-based reactions. This is the basis for exploring the binary mixture of the [EMIM]Cl ionic liquid with water. Figure 27.3 shows the XAFS spectra for the two extremes of the fully hydrated Cu 2+ in water and the fully ion paired species CuCl 4 2À in the ionic liquid. The first peak in the radial structure plots of Fig. 27.3a corresponds to either full H 2 O or full Cl À first shell ligands. The coordination numbers and bond distances from XAFS for the Cu-Cl species are consistent with a tetrahedral species. In Fig. 27.3a, the multiple scattering peaks at 3.3 and 3.8 Å for the aqua and Cl À species are due to the nearly square planar, equatorial waters and the tetrahedral chlorides, respectively (for chlorides this involves the weaker, double-return multiple scattering path). These features exemplify one of the strengths of the XAFS method, the ability to use the photoelectron multiple scattering structure to directly probe the first-shell bonding symmetry. An independent measure of symmetry is also derived from changes in the intensity of the XANES pre-edge peak (not shown) at 8978 eV that is assigned to the 1s -> 3d transition. This further confirms the symmetry changes that occur in low-dielectric constant solvent.
Figure 27.3b shows schematics of the Cu 2+ structure at various water concentrations as they were derived from the XAFS fit results. Remarkably, the tetrahedral CuCl 4
2À species persist up to about 80 mol% water. It is only at even higher water concentrations that the Cu 2+ coordination with Cl-decreases and the formation of a partially hydrated Cu 2+ occurs. This behavior is ascribed to the change in the dielectric constant of the ionic liquid/water mixture. Below 80 mol% water the dielectric constant is closer to that of a nonpolar solvent, while above 80 % the value rises rapidly to that of pure water. The types of structural transitions illustrated in Fig. 27.3b are essential starting points for an understanding of the catalyst mechanism and kinetics in such homogeneous systems.

Examples of Metal Cluster Systems

Rh 4 Cluster Catalyzed Dehydrogenation of Amine Boranes
There has been intense interest in the development of hydrogen storage materials and their utilization over the past 15 years. One such category of compounds is the amine boranes with the general formula NHR 2 -BH 3 . For these systems a catalyst is required to rapidly and quantitatively release the H 2 contained in these compounds.
As shown in Fig. 27.4a, a homogeneous rhodium-based complex derived from commercially available [(1,5-cylcooctadiene)RhCl] 2 is an efficient catalyst for H 2 release from Me 2 NHBH 3 (DMAB) at room temperature [40,50,51]. The starting solution is orange, but this turns black during the reaction until finally a black precipitate forms at the end of the reaction. It was initially suggested that metallic rhodium nanoparticles were the catalytic species as determined by ex situ analysis (TEM, XRD) [52]. Organometallic chemists generally believe that homogeneous 2À species. Reprinted with permission from ref. [49]. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society metal solutions that turn black are a sure sign that metallic particles are being formed [53].
This homogeneous catalyst reaction is an ideal system for operando XAFS. In contrast to the manganese system described above the equipment needed for this operando XAFS study is relatively simple. A small hole drilled into a standard glass vial as shown in Fig. 27.1a allows for the release of H 2 that is produced during these room temperature reactions. Figure 27.4b shows the e χ R ð Þ j j plots for the starting complex and the rhodium catalyst species under operando conditions. In the region from 4 to 6 Å, there is no long-range scattering that would be expected for rhodium nanoparticles, suggesting that metal-like rhodium species are not formed during the reaction. The observed Rh-Rh distance (2.73 Å) is longer than in rhodium metal (2.68 Å) also supporting the absence of metallic rhodium. The best-fit model is a four rhodium cluster in a tetrahedral arrangement (coordination number of 3 for each rhodium to another rhodium) with light atoms (C, B, or N) directly bonded to the rhodium as ligands. Of these three light elements, the results suggest that boron is the most likely to be bonded to the rhodium [40,51]. Spectral analysis suggests Reprinted with permission from ref. [40]. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society that greater than 99 % of the rhodium in the system is present in these Rh 4 clusters. Within the accuracy of the experiments, the absence of metallic nanoparticles is confirmed. As the reaction starts to approach the endpoint, a black precipitate is observed that is concomitant with the loss of soluble rhodium signal intensity. Careful XAFS analysis of this precipitate under operando conditions (without exposing the solid to air) showed an XAFS spectrum that is almost identical to that of dissolved rhodium clusters. For this solid precipitate it is postulated that tetra-rhodium clusters are bridged by the DMAB dimer product to form extended polymer-like arrangements that are insoluble as shown in the schematic of Fig. 27.4c. This finding was supported by the observation that this black precipitate is rapidly redissolved when more of the starting DMAB compound is added to the system.
An intriguing finding from XAFS is that exposure of the reaction solution to even small amounts of oxygen (from air) either during or after the reaction led to the formation of metallic rhodium. All attempts to analyze the black precipitate spectroscopically ex situ always showed the presence of metallic rhodium due to contamination with oxygen. It was proposed the Rh 4 ligands (DMAB dimers) are extremely sensitive to oxidation and the loss of these stabilizing ligands leads immediately to the formation of metallic rhodium particles. This example demonstrates the essential role of operando XAFS spectroscopy yielding information not possible by ex situ analysis. The finding of the tetra-rhodium clusters had not previously been postulated in these systems. This new finding led to questions about whether there were other rhodium (and other metal-containing) systems that were actually catalyzed by clusters instead of metallic nanoparticles. This then led to the reinvestigation of a 30-year old chemistry question in catalysis that is described in the next section.

Rh 4 Cluster Catalyzed Hydrogenation of Benzene
Based upon the above results showing that tetra-rhodium clusters were important in dehydrogenation catalysis, other systems were explored in which there was uncertainty whether metallic rhodium nanoparticles or homogeneous rhodium complexes were the active species. Among these, a system described by Maitlis in 1977 for the hydrogenation of benzene stood out. Maitlis [54] proposed that a rhodium species, [Cp*RhCl 2 ] 2 (Cp* being pentamethylcyclopentadienyl), hydrogenates benzene to cyclohexane under H 2 pressure at 100 C (see Fig. 27.5a) through a homogeneous catalytic mechanism rather than through the presence of metallic particles. Controversy over this interpretation of the active catalyst reigned for over 30 years with more recent literature reports [55,56] declaring that metallic rhodium nanoparticles were instead the true catalyst. As mentioned previously, a general observation in organometallic catalyst community is that the presence of a black solution or a black precipitate is evidence of metallic catalyst. In fact, the hydrogenation of benzene has come to be perceived as the "tell tale sign of heterogeneous catalysis" [53]. Further, earlier ex situ techniques [55,56] had been used in an attempt to validate the presence of metallic rhodium and a "key" analytical test (the mercury test) was purported to demonstrate that metallic rhodium particles were the catalytic species (For a discussion of the mercury test please see references [56][57][58][59].). Operando XAFS was used to resolve this controversy [43]. The XAFS cell of choice for this system is shown in Fig. 27.1c. Built-in PEEK windows allowed operation at H 2 pressures up to 50 bar and temperatures near 100 C.
Similar to the DMAB reaction mentioned above, no metallic rhodium was observed in this reaction system [43]. As shown in Fig. 27.5c, again tetra-rhodium clusters were the only viable fit to the XAFS spectrum, with light atoms (C and Cl) filling the outer coordination sphere of the Rh 4 -cluster. The fitted structural cluster under operando conditions. The spectrum of Rh(0) metal that has been scaled by 1/7 is shown for comparison. Reprinted with permission from ref. [43]. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society parameters for the Rh 4 cluster are reported in Fig. 27.5b. Indeed, even at room temperature XAFS revealed structural changes of the catalyst precursor, [Cp*RhCl 2 ] 2 , via simple dissolution in the reaction solvent. In the presence of H 2 the rhodium complex begins to form tetra-rhodium clusters as the solution slowly turns black at room temperature. At the reaction temperature of 100 C, the transformation to the Rh 4 cluster is rapid.
In this system the rhodium-to-substrate concentration was initially four times that of the original Maitlis study. This provided an improved signal-to-noise ratio for XAFS. Reactions conducted under the original concentration and conditions also yielded the same results, showing that at least in this case, increased catalyst concentration did not affect the observed kinetics, spectroscopy, or catalyst speciation.
Later investigations [43] of the kinetics and "mercury test" for this reaction demonstrated that the mercury test also poisons the homogeneous Rh 4 clusters in a similar way that it poisons metallic nanoparticles, and it is therefore an unreliable test of whether a reaction is catalyzed by a homogeneous or a heterogeneous process. Overall, these XAFS findings completely revised the understanding of this common "textbook" example of benzene hydrogenation and raised the question of whether tetra-rhodium clusters represent a "magic" species in such catalytic reactions.

Rh Monomer Hydrogenation of Cyclohexene
A careful operando XAFS spectroscopic, poisoning, and kinetic reinvestigation [59] of the room temperature hydrogenation of cyclohexene earlier performed by Maitlis [54] demonstrated a different outcome for the Rh catalyst structure than for the benzene system. In this case, a black color is not obtained during the reaction and most researchers believed this to be a homogeneous (non-nanoparticle) catalyst reaction system. Yet, at much higher initial rhodium concentrations the Rh 4 clusters observed in the previous examples were again observed to form during the reaction by XAFS [59]. As previously mentioned, the structure of the initial catalyst precursor, [Cp*RhCl 2 ] 2 , immediately changes upon dissolution in the reaction medium, even before addition of H 2 . As shown in Fig. 27.6, the initial rhodium dimer loses at least one chloride ligand upon dissolution in the reaction medium. Reactions under lower rhodium concentrations (near to those originally reported by Maitlis) showed far less rhodium tetramer being formed early during the reaction than at the higher concentrations. Careful kinetic and carefully redesigned catalyst poisoning experiments showed that the actual catalyst in this reaction is not a Rh 4 cluster but rather a rhodium monomer. This combined kinetic and XAFS spectroscopic study shows the high importance of operando studies to delineate the mostly likely catalytic Rh species.

Summary
In these examples we have shown how XAFS spectroscopy probes homogeneous systems to obtain information about catalyst structure not obtainable by other methods. For instance, the unexpected discovery of tetra-rhodium organometallic clusters as the predominant species during the dehydrogenation of amine boranes and the hydrogenation of benzene was only accomplished through the use of operando XAFS. Ex situ techniques were found to yield species not relevant to the catalyst system. The knowledge that rhodium-tetramers were important for catalysis in one system led to the reinvestigation of other systems containing clusters that have not been isolable. In general, careful planning and implementation of XAFS gives a clear view of catalyst structures during the actual catalysis. While XAFS observation of a metal species during catalysis is not necessarily proof that the observed species is catalytically active, it does yield powerful information about the reaction mechanism, especially when combined with other analytical techniques. Unlike other spectroscopic techniques such as NMR and IR, there are no limitations with respect to active NMR nuclei or indirect interpretation of IR vibrational modes that typically have low extinction coefficients.

Introduction
Nature uses remarkably varied systems and mechanisms to perform chemical reactions with efficiency, speed, and complexity. At the active site of many enzymes are metal centers, responsible for the rearrangement of electrons and atoms in order to carry out electron transfer and catalytic reactions. Some of the representative metal clusters, especially those that contain heterometallic clusters, that are related to important reactions in nature, are shown in Fig. 28.1 [1][2][3][4]. Many of these consist of transition metals, such as V, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Mo, W and others. Using the flexibility of their electronic structures that can accommodate different redox states, they catalyze multi-electron reactions in aqueous solution, under conditions of ambient temperature and pressure.
Geometric and electronic structures of metal catalytic centers have been studied with X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) in numerous metalloenzymes by taking advantage of the element-specificity of X-ray spectroscopy. X-ray absorption near edge spectroscopy (XANES) has been commonly used as a probe of the metal oxidation state, while extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) has been applied for identifying the geometric structure of the metal complexes, and the method does not require single crystals. This makes the EXAFS method a powerful tool for extracting structural information of reaction intermediates, that cannot be crystallized. While solution NMR study is another way to get structural information of non-crystalline biological samples, it is difficult to apply the method to large metalloenzymes (>100 kDa) [5] or to study paramagnetic metal centers of metalloenzymes.
In addition to XAS, more advanced X-ray-based techniques such as RIXS (resonant inelastic X-ray scattering), XES (X-ray emission spectroscopy), and X-ray Raman spectroscopy [6], have been introduced to study biological systems, owing to the availability of bright synchrotron X-ray sources. XAS and XES data collection of biological samples have become somewhat routine. However, getting useful data often remains challenging due to several difficulties that are unique to biological systems. For example, X-ray-induced changes during data collection have been a concern. Reducing the background signal that arise from light atoms is another issue. Furthermore, interpreting X-ray spectroscopic data of biological systems often requires a set of adequate model complexes, that provide the basis for evaluating the influence of the coordination environment of the absorber elements. Study of structurally well-characterized model complexes also provides a benchmark for understanding the EXAFS from metal systems of unknown structures.
In this chapter, the X-ray spectroscopy methods that have been used for studying biological samples are described, using several examples. In addition to the synchrotron X-ray-based methods, recent introduction of XFELs (X-ray free electron lasers) have opened a new way of collecting X-ray spectroscopy of biological systems by capturing reaction intermediates under physiological conditions, and this chapter touches on some of the applications that have been demonstrated recently.

X-Ray Spectroscopy of Biological Systems
X-ray crystallography and X-ray spectroscopy of metalloenzymes provide complementary information: crystallography probes the structural changes of the cofactor and the overall protein, while XAS provides detailed information about changes in Fig. 28.1 Some examples of metalloenzymes that contain heterometallic clusters, such as NiFe hydrogenase, FeMo nitrogenase, Mn 4 Ca water oxidase, and FeCu cytc oxidase, that have been studied using X-ray spectroscopic techniques the electronic structure of the metal of interest and its local structural information. When combined, these complementary measurements will provide a more detailed understanding of important enzymatic reactions.
In general, the advantage of EXAFS over X-ray crystallography is that the local structural information around the metal of interest can be obtained even from disordered samples such as powders and solution, and usually the metal-metal and metal-ligand distance information is much better than that can be obtained from crystallography. However, ordered samples like oriented membranes and single crystals often increase the information obtained from X-ray spectroscopy. The advantages and the limitations of XAS for the structural studies of biological systems are summarized in detail below.
1. In a metalloenzyme with multiple metal centers like cytochrome oxidase (Cu and Fe), photosystem II (Mn and Ca), or nitrogenase (Fe/V and Mo), it is possible to study the structural environment of each metal atom independently, because of the element specificity of XAS. 2. The metal of interest is never "silent" with respect to X-ray spectra, and one can always probe the metal site structure by X-ray spectroscopy. It could be "silent" with respect to EPR (electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy), optical, or other spectroscopic methods. However, this could become a disadvantage, if there are several metal centers going through different chemical states. 3. X-ray spectroscopy is not limited by the state of the sample, because it is sensitive only to the local metal site structure. Therefore, one can either trap intermediates in the enzymatic cycle or modify the site by the addition of inhibitors or substrate, or generate other chemical modifications or site-directed mutations. Such samples can be made as frozen solutions, avoiding the problems of trying to obtain single crystals.
It is also important to realize the intrinsic limitations of EXAFS for studying structures. A frequent problem is the inability to distinguish between scattering atoms with little difference in atomic number (C, N, O or S, Cl, or Mn, Fe). Distances are usually the most reliably determined structural parameters from EXAFS. But the range of data that can be collected, often-times due to practical reasons like the presence of the K-edge of another metal, or data collection time for dilute biological samples, limits the resolution of distance determinations to between 0.1 and 0.2 Å. Also it is difficult to determine whether a Fourier peak should be fit to one distance with a relatively large disorder parameter or to two distances, each having a small disorder parameter. Careful statistical analysis, taking into consideration the degrees of freedom in the fits, should precede any such analysis. The resolution in the distance Δr can be estimated from the relation that ΔrΔk ~1 (see Sect. 4.2). Determination of coordination numbers or number of backscatterers is fraught with difficulties. The Debye-Waller factor is strongly correlated with the coordination number and one must have recourse to other information to narrow the range that is possible from curve fitting analysis alone.
It is therefore very useful to compare the spectra from the complex in the metalloenzyme to some known model complexes and then use Debye-Waller parameters obtained from the model complexes in the fits.

Radiation-Induced Changes During Data Collection
Damage to biological samples by X-rays is cause for serious concern for X-ray based experiments, in particular for the study of biological samples. However, with the right precautions one can successfully perform these experiments under the threshold of radiation damage. At synchrotron sources, most of the damage is produced by free radicals and hydrated electrons that are produced by X-rays in biological samples. The diffusion of the free radicals and hydrated electrons can be minimized by the use of low temperatures. The use of a liquid He flow cryostat or liquid He cryostream, where the samples are at atmospheric pressure in a He gas atmosphere, has greatly reduced the risk of sample damage by X-rays. XAS experiments require a lower X-ray dose than X-ray crystallography, and radiation damage can be precisely monitored and controlled, thus allowing for data collection from an intact form of metal catalytic centers.
An example of the X-ray-induced changes is shown in Fig. 28.2. Solutions of Photosystem II (PSII) that consists of the MnCaO 5 catalytic center were exposed to various X-ray doses at 100 K, leading to reduction of 5, 10 or 25 %, of the Mn in the sample from the native Mn(III,IV) to Mn(II) [7]. The corresponding XANES spectra are shown in Fig. 28.2a. A clear shift in the K-edge toward lower energies, due to the reduction to Mn(II) can be seen when comparing with the intact state The Mn XANES spectrum of the oxygen-evolving complex from PS II that has been photo-reduced by X-rays to different levels between 5 and 25 %, compared to a spectrum from an intact PS II sample. (b) The corresponding Mn EXAFS Fourier transforms from the same PS II samples, showing the disruption of the Mn 4 Ca oxo-bridged complex following X-ray radiation induced reduction. This disruption manifests itself as a decrease in the intensity of FT peaks assigned to Mn-Mn interactions at ~2.7 Å and/or Mn-Mn/Mn-Ca interactions at 3.2 Å [7] spectrum from the native Mn(III,IV) form. In the EXAFS spectra (Fig. 28.2b), the intensities of all three peaks are decreased upon Mn reduction, with the most pronounced decrease in the second peak intensity, showing that upon Mn reduction Mn-Mn distances change and they are elongated. The reduction of the metal center by X-rays does not necessarily go through the catalytic reduction pathway, as it is likely caused by the random attack of hydroxyl radicals that are created by the interaction of X-rays and water molecules. Similar observations have been made in many Fe-containing proteins such as putidaredoxin [8], Cytochrome C peroxidase [9], and Fe/Fe and Fe/Mn ribonucleotide reductase [10], where the states generated by X-ray photoreduction are significantly different from the native catalytic state of the metal center. These studies show that radiation-induced changes are a general problem when studying metalloenzymes with X-rays. Such radiation-induced effects could potentially be turned into a tool to obtain new insights into the structural and electronic structural nature of the metal cluster.
Nevertheless, radiation-induced changes remain one of the most challenging aspects in biological X-ray spectroscopy. New approaches to overcome such effects and collect radiation-damage-free data have become possible, using XFELs which is described in Sect. 5.

Application of Various X-Ray Spectroscopy
Techniques to Study Metalloenzymes

Polarized X-Ray Absorption Spectroscopy
As described above, the advantage of XAS is that the local structural information around the element of interest can be obtained from disordered samples such as powders and solutions. However, ordered samples like membranes and single crystals often increases the information obtained from XAS. For oriented single crystals or ordered membranes the interatomic vector orientations can be deduced from dichroism measurements. Membrane proteins can be oriented on a substrate such that the lipid membrane planes are roughly parallel to the substrate surface. This imparts a one-dimensional order to these samples; while the z-axis for each membrane (collinear with the membrane normal) is roughly parallel to the substrate normal, the x-and y-axes remain disordered. Exploiting the plane-polarized nature of synchrotron radiation, spectra can be collected at different angles between the substrate normal and the X-ray E vector (Fig. 28.3a). The dichroism, which is the dependence of the intensity of the absorber-backscatterer pair present in the oriented samples as a function of the polarization of the X-rays, is reflected in, and can be extracted from, the resulting X-ray absorption spectra [11][12][13]. The EXAFS of the oriented PS II samples exhibits distinct dichroism, from which one can deduce the relative orientations of several interatomic vector directions relative to the membrane normal and derive a topological representation of the metal sites in the OEC [14].
Further refinement can be performed for samples with three-dimensional order. Figure 28.3b shows the experimental setup for collecting single crystal XAS data at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, BL 9-3. It consists of a kappa goniometer, a 30-element Ge detector for collecting XAS data, and a 2D detector placed behind the sample for in situ collection of diffraction data to determine the crystal orientation. The crystals are cooled using a liquid He cryostream to minimize the radiation-induced changes of the sample. Single-crystal X-ray spectroscopy has been performed on model complexes [15] and metalloproteins [16][17][18][19]. These studies have been able to significantly expand the XAS information available for these systems over what is gleaned from studies of isotropic samples.
An example of polarized XANES spectra from a Mn(V) model complex is shown in Fig. 28.3c [11]. In this study, the orientationally resolved pre-edge peaks were correlated to DFT calculations, and the results were used for assigning the 1s to 3d transition components. The method was also applied to PSII in the dark state prior to the determination of high-resolution X-ray crystal structure, and the study improved the resolution and orientation of the metal-metal distances in EXAFS [17].

Range-Extended EXAFS
In the typical EXAFS measurement of biological samples, spectra are taken up to ~500 eV above the K-absorption edge, that provides a k-range of ~12.0 /Å. However, longer the k-range, the EXAFS distance resolution improves and it becomes important for some systems to resolve distance heterogeneity with similar metal-ligand and metal-metal interactions. The distance resolution in a typical EXAFS experiment is given by ΔR ¼ π=2k max ð28:1Þ
where k max is the maximum energy of the photoelectron of the absorber element.
Getting larger k max is not always possible, in particular, for systems which contain adjacent elements in the periodic table due to the presence of the rising edge of the next element. In principle, solid-state detectors can be used for discriminating fluorescence signals from different elements, by electronically windowing the Kα fluorescence from the absorber atom and collecting XAS data as an excitation spectrum. However, the energy resolution of the detector at the transition metal absorption edges is about 150-200 eV (fwhm), and this makes it difficult to discriminate signals from adjacent transition metals. For the Mn K-edge EXAFS studies of PS II, for example, the absorption edge of the obligatory Fe in PS II (2-3Fe/PS II) limits the EXAFS energy range (Fig. 28.4). The use of a highresolution crystal monochromator provides a method to selectively separate the fluorescence signals from adjacent metals, resulting in the collection of data to higher photoelectron energies and leading to increased distance resolution and more precise determination in the numbers of metal-metal vectors. (Fig. 28.5a). These spectra change depending on the chemical environment of the metals of interest. In particular, Kβ spectra have been used in biological systems for probing the oxidation states and identifying the ligand environment. Kβ 1,3 /Kβ 0 spectra arise predominantly from the exchange interaction between the metal 3p and the net electron spin in the metal valence shell, i.e., the effective number of unpaired metal 3d electrons. Therefore, the spectrum is sensitive to the spin state of the metals, which indirectly reflects the oxidation state and covalency of the metal site, and has often been used for determining the oxidation states of metal catalytic sites [6]. Kβ 1,3 arises from the constructive spin interactions, while Kβ 0 from destructive spin interactions.

X-Ray Emission Spectroscopy
The sensitivity of the Kβ 1,3 /Kβ 0 spectra to the number of unpaired 3d electrons has the potential for being used for probing different metal sites in multinuclear clusters. As mentioned in Section II, there is no "silent" state in XAS. This can be a limiting factor for studying the system that contains several of the same element. For uniquely probing one particular reaction site, the use of different K-emission signals could become useful. One example is the [FeFe]-hydrogenases that contain 6 Fe in the metal catalytic center (H-cluster). Haumann et al. studied the H-cluster with site-selective XAS method, by using the Kβ 1,3 and Kβ 0 signals to distinguish between the low and high spin Fe sites in the two subcomplexes (Fig. 28.5b) [20]. By using a high-resolution spectrometer, in one case the Kβ-detected XAS was collected at the Kβ 0 energy and in the other case at the Kβ 1,3 energy; the former one represents the 2Fe site, while the latter one represents the 4Fe4S site. Thus the response of the two sites in different chemical states can be separately analyzed.
The higher energy emission peaks above Kβ 1,3 originate from valence-to-core transitions just below the Fermi level and can be separated into Kβ 00 and the Kβ 2,5 emission (Fig. 28.5a). Kβ 2,5 emission is predominantly from ligand 2p (metal 4p) to metal 1s, and the Kβ 00 emission is assigned to a ligand 2s to metal 1s; both are referred to as cross-over transitions [6]. Therefore, only direct ligands to the metal of interest are probed with Kβ 2,5 /Kβ 00 emission, i.e., other C, N, and O atoms in the  [20]. (c) The valence to core Kβ 2,5 /Kβ 00 emission spectra of a series of dinuclear Mn IV complexes, where the bridging oxygen was protonated sequentially [21] protein media do not contribute to the spectra. In particular, the energy of the Kβ 00 transition depends on the difference between the metal 1s and ligand 2s binding energies, which reflects the environment of the ligand owing to orbital hybridization.
Detecting the chemical states of ligands is important for understanding the reaction mechanism of numerous metalloenzymes. In particular, protonation/ deprotonation states of ligands moderate reaction chemistry in metal centers in biologically important processes. For example, copper oxo/hydroxo/peroxo complexes play vital roles in respiration, such as in hemocyanin [22], in biological metabolic pathways such as catechol oxidase activity or activation of aliphatic C-H bonds by dopamine β-monooxygenase [23], peptidyl-glycine α-amidating enzyme, and particulate methane monooxygenase [24]. It is also known that FeFe clusters in methane monooxygenase catalyze the hydroxylation of methane to methanol [25]. Understanding these events requires techniques that are sensitive enough to differentiate species that differ only by a single proton. Fig. 28.5c shows how the Kβ 2,5 and Kβ 00 spectra change depending on the protonation state of the bridging oxygen ligands of the metal cluster [21]. Several techniques have the potential to detect such a single protonation event, that includes vibrational spectroscopy and ligand sensitive EPR techniques such as ENDOR (electron nuclear double resonance), ESEEM (electron spin echo envelope modulation), and HYSCORE (hyperfine sub-level correlation). The advantage of X-ray-based methods over EPR techniques is their element specificity and that they are unrestricted by the spin states of the compounds.
The Kβ 2,5 and Kβ 00 XES was also applied for the study of nitrogenase to identify the central atom of the FeMoco cluster [26], using the element sensitivity of the Kβ 00 peak position. A combination of the detailed data analysis and the theoretical calculations revealed that the central atom is a carbon.

Resonant Inelastic X-Ray Scattering Spectroscopy
The pre-edge region of metal K-edge XAS, that corresponds to the 1s to 3d transition, is a probe of metal oxidation state and local geometry of metal catalytic centers. However, the K pre-edge spectra are usually weak compared to the K-main edge, as they mostly arise from quadrupole transition matrix elements. In addition, it suffers from a strong background from the dipole-allowed transition of the main edge, particularly for early transition metals. Transition metal L-edge XAS are in some ways a superior chemical probe to K-edge spectra as (1) 2p ! 3d transitions are allowed under dipole selection rules, while only s ! p transitions are allowed at the K-edge, (2) greater sensitivity to the occupancy of the 3d orbitals of metal provides a better indication of the oxidation states and symmetry of the complex involved. It is therefore anticipated that examination of the L-edge region will provide oxidation state information of the metal centers with significantly better resolution than that from K-edges. However, the disadvantage is that the energy of these transitions requires the use of soft X-rays for direct excitation, leading to drastically increased radiation damage compared to high energy hard X-rays (100 times higher) and only surface absorption for bulk samples. These issues make soft X-ray (metal L-edge) spectroscopy less applicable to biological systems.
The above-described problems can be overcome in 1s2p RIXS (resonant inelastic X-ray scattering spectroscopy. In this method, hard X-rays tuned to the energy of the K pre-edge are used to excite a 1s electron into an unoccupied valence orbital (1s to 3d transition), and the emission due to decay of a 3p or 2p electron into the 1s shell is measured as a function of the excitation energy. In experiments, the incident energy is varied across the metal K-edge (1s to 3d) using hard X-rays, and the crystal analyzer is scanned over the Kα emission energy (2p to 1s). The energy difference between excitation and emission corresponds to the energy difference between 2p or 3p and 3d orbitals and, therefore, one can get L-edge-like XAS spectrum while taking advantage of using hard X-rays (high-excitation energy and therefore the high X-ray penetration depth and larger attenuation length) to probe these transitions indirectly. In addition, the RIXS 2D plot also makes the background separation of the pre-edge structure from the main K-edge feature easier.
As an example, the Fe site of the cytochrome c (cyt c) and its model compound was studied by Fe 1s2d RIXS [27]. The RIXS study was used to quantify the highly covalent nature of the porphyrin environment in the heme cofactor, through the analysis of the L-edge XAS-like data from RIXS, and showed the increased covalency for the Fe-S(Met) relative to Fe-N(His) axial ligand and a higher degree of covalency for the ferric states relative to the ferrous states. Namely, it suggests that the bond strengths for the Fe(II) and Fe(III) states are a critical factor for the enzymatic function.

Application of XFELs for the Study of Metalloenzymes Using X-Ray Spectroscopy
X-ray based techniques, such as X-ray spectroscopy, X-ray crystallography, as well as X-ray scattering methods, have contributed significantly to the structural and functional studies of metalloenzymes in the last decades, and have become indispensable methods. However, to minimize or eliminate radiation-induced changes during data collection has remained challenging. As described in Section II, the data collection of biological samples is usually carried out at cryogenic temperature to minimize the X-ray induced effect. However, there is an increasing effort to understand biological phenomena as the enzymes function, through studies under physiological/functional conditions. Additionally, the need to probe rare transitions, which often are superior probes of chemical states but require very high photon fluxes, , within a reasonable time, is another issue. The recent advent of XFELs [28,29] brought the possibility of probing labile biological systems with high dose X-rays, by outrunning the radiation damage processes and extracting the information before manifestation of the X-ray-induced changes to the sample using fs X-ray pulses. XFELs produce high intensity X-ray pulses in the fs time regime. In practice the number of photons in a single <50 fs pulse is comparable to the number of photons available per second in a modern third generation synchrotron end station. In addition to serial femtosecond crystallography (e.g., Ref. [30]), X-ray spectroscopic techniques have been applied for the study of metalloenzymes at the XFELs, and have shown promise. Both XAS and XES methods are currently targeted at XFEL sources.
The hard X-ray XES method has a few advantages, when it is applied at the XFELs. No monochromatization is necessary and the full SASE (self-amplified spontaneous emission) bandwidth of the XFEL pulse can be used in the shot-byshot data collection [31][32][33]. Kβ XES on dilute solution samples was initially demonstrated for Mn compounds [31], showing that the fs pulses used did not disturb the electronic structure of the compounds studied (Mn II and Mn III,IV ). For iron(II) tris(2,2 0 -bipyridine) it was also possible to record time resolved XES at 50 fs to 1 ps after a laser excitation and resolve the kinetics of the light-induced spin change using 50 mM concentration in a 100 μm thick liquid jet. An XAS method was also used at XFELs for pump-probe measurements [34], providing unique insights into the evolution of the electronic structure over the reaction cycle. In addition to hard X-ray spectroscopy, XFELs provide a new opportunity to carry out biological soft X-ray spectroscopy [35] by overcoming severe radiation damage due to the high absorption cross section at the soft X-ray energy range, that has been an issue in the synchrotron X-ray sources.
Among the several X-ray spectroscopic methods, XES is well suited to be combined with other techniques. For example, XES can be collected simultaneously with X-ray crystallography by choosing the same excitation energy (Fig. 28.6). Such a method was developed and used for studying the water oxidation reaction in PS II with microcrystals [36]. In this approach, XES provides a diagnostic capability by providing the electronic structure of the highly radiation sensitive Mn 4 CaO 5 cluster in PS II. Furthermore, it serves for monitoring the catalytic turn over under the experimental conditions.

Future Direction
X-ray spectroscopy, together with X-ray crystallography, has been an extremely important method for understanding the mechanism of metal catalytic reactions in metalloenzymes. The development of theoretical approaches, like density functional theory (DFT), with well-characterized model inorganic complexes has provided the necessary information for interpreting spectroscopic data. Furthermore, the recent development of bright synchrotron X-ray sources and the X-ray free electron laser further opens new horizons for data collection from biological samples under physiological conditions in a time-resolved manner. These developments altogether will provide tools for us to understand the mechanism of catalytic Fig. 28.6 Setup for simultaneous XES/XRD at the LCLS XFEL. The XES spectrometer is mounted at 90 to the fs X-ray pulses and the XRD is recorded in forward scattering. The sample is introduced into the interaction region using a jet as shown here, but other methods can also be used. The energy dispersive XES spectrometer is shown at top right. Illumination of the samples is achieved by visible laser pumps and are used for time resolved optical pump X-ray probe measurements [36] gold, have proven versatile heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysts for such oxidations, often employing oxygen or air as the oxidant. Recent efforts to improve the activity, selectivity and commercial implementation of heterogeneous transition metal selox catalysts have driven research into the nature of the active site, oxidation/deactivation mechanism, and the formulation of bimetallic variants, to which X-ray absorption (XAS) studies have made an invaluable contribution [12].

Monometallic Selox Catalysts
Quick and dispersive XAS have the capability to monitor dynamic changes in catalyst structure under reaction conditions ("operando" spectroscopy) and have been applied to alcohol selox over Pd [13][14][15][16][17], Pt [18,19] and Ru [18] nanoparticles. Operando XAS measurements by Grunwaldt et al. on palladium catalysed selox [16], which mirrored an earlier original report by Lee [13], evidenced in situ reduction of oxidised palladium in a Pd/Al 2 O 3 catalyst during cinnamyl alcohol oxidation within a continuous flow fixed-bed reactor, and consequently proposed a reaction mechanism in which metallic palladium was proposed the active species for benzyl alcohol selox (Scheme 29.1) [20]. Unfortunately, kinetics of cinnamyl alcohol selox were not measured in parallel with XAS to explore the impact of this palladium reduction on catalysis; however, a follow-up study of 1-phenylethanol selox employing the same reactor configuration (and oxygen-deficient conditions) demonstrated strong interplay between selox conversion/selectivity and Pd oxidation state [21]. The authors concluded that metallic Pd was the catalytically active species, an assertion re-affirmed in follow-up in situ ATR-IR/XAS measurements of benzyl [20] and cinnamyl alcohol [18] selox respectively in toluene and under supercritical CO 2 .
It is interesting to note that in each of these studies the introduction of oxygen to the reactant feed improved alcohol conversion and aldehyde production, observations which the authors interpreted as due to hydrogen abstraction from the catalyst surface rather than a more plausible change in palladium oxidation state. In contrast to their liquid phase experiments, high pressure X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) measurements on Pd/Al 2 O 3 catalysed benzyl alcohol selox in supercritical CO 2 led Grunwaldt and Baiker to conclude that maximum activity arose from particles mainly oxidised in the surface/shelf-edge [22]. In parallel, Lee and co-workers systematically characterised the physicochemical properties of palladium nanoparticles as a function of size over non-reducible supports and thereby quantified fundamental structure-function relations in allylic alcohol selox [14,15,[23][24][25][26][27][28]. The combination of XPS and XAS measurements revealed that freshly prepared carbon [14], alumina [15,24,27,28] and silica [23,25,26] supported nanoparticles are prone to oxidation as their diameter falls below ~4 nm, with the fraction of PdO proportional to the support surface area and pore connectivity. Complementary kinetic analyses uncovered a direct correlation between the surface PdO content and TOFs towards cinnamyl and crotyl alcohol [15,23,24]. Operando liquid phase XAS of Pd/C [14] and Pd/Al 2 O 3 -SBA-15 [27] catalysts during cinnamyl alcohol selox evidenced in situ reduction of PdO (Fig. 29.1); however, by virtue of simultaneously measuring the associated selox kinetics, Lee et al. proved unequivocally that this palladium oxide!metal transition was responsible for catalyst deactivation, the latter consistent with surface science predictions that metallic palladium favours aldehyde decarbonylation and consequent selfpoisoning by CO and organic residues [29,30]. Analogous studies of Pt catalysed alcohol selox confirmed surface PtO 2 as the active phase [31].
The nature of the active phase in alcohol selox catalysed by palladium nanoparticles was conclusively established through subsequent multi-dimensional spectroscopic investigations of vapour phase crotyl alcohol selox [32][33][34]. Dynamic, synchronous Diffuse Reflectance Infrared Fourier Transform Spectroscopy (DRIFTS)/mass spectrometry (MS)/XAS measurements of oxide supported and colloidal palladium were performed in a environmental cell [35] to simultaneously interrogate adsorbates on the catalyst surface, the mean oxidation state of Pd and concomitant reactivity in the absence of competitive solvent effects [36,37]. Palladium nanoparticles were partially oxidised at low reaction temperatures, and unaffected by exposure to either alcohol or oxygen (Fig. 29.2). Oxidative hydrogenation to crotonaldehyde was facile over oxide surfaces. Higher reaction temperatures induced PdO reduction in response to crotyl alcohol exposure, mirroring the behaviour observed during liquid phase selox in Fig. 29.2, and could be reversed by subsequent oxygen exposure. Such reactant-induced restructuring was independent of the support type or catalyst synthesis method, but of a magnitude inversely proportional to particle size [34]. These dynamic measurements decoupled the relative reactivity of palladium oxide from metal, revealing that PdO favoured crotyl alcohol selox to crotonaldehyde and crotonic acid, whereas metallic palladium drove Scheme 29.1 Proposed reaction mechanism for benzyl alcohol selox over commercial Pd/Al 2 O 3 catalysts [16] secondary decarbonylation to propene and CO in accordance with the surface chemistry of Pd (111) model catalysts [29,38]. Allylic alcohol selox thus depends upon a delicate balance between maximising the rate of oxidative dehydrogenation without accumulating sufficient surface hydrogen to induce reduction of catalytically active palladium surface oxide. Oxide reducibility has thus emerged as a critical factor in achieving active and selective alcohol selox catalysts.
Supported monomeric Pd complexes have also shown great promise in selox, wherein XAS has proven crucial in elucidating the active species. Mori et al. employed ex situ Pd K-edge XAS to demonstrate that hydroxyapatites treated with PdCl 2 (PhCN) 2 afforded two types of immobilised complex with distinct coordination spheres dependent upon the Ca/P ratio of the parent hydroxyapatite (Fig. 29.3): [39,40] a monomeric PdCl 2 over stoichiometric Ca 10 (PO 4 ) 6 (OH) 2 which transformed during in situ alcohol selox into 4 nm metallic Pd particles resulting in Turnover Numbers (TONs) up to 236,000; or a monomeric Pd II phosphate complex at Ca-deficient sites in nonstoichiometric hydroxyapatite, Complementary research by Scott and co-workers explored the chemical, structural and electronic properties of PVP-stabilised AuPd bimetallic colloidal nanoparticles [48] by Pd K-edge and Au L III -edge EXAFS and XANES for aerobic crotyl alcohol selox. In situ EXAFS of sequentially reduced bimetallic nanoparticles revealed the presence of Pd-enriched surfaces surrounding Au cores, while XANES indicated Pd atoms within the selvedge were electron deficient relative to monometallic Pd or co-reduced AuPd nanoparticles [49]. Sequentially  [39,40] reduced (Pd rich) surfaces were extremely active for crotyl alcohol oxidation in the absence of base (generally considered essential for gold catalysed selox reactions [50,51]), and exhibited excellent selectivity to crotonaldehyde, superior to co-reduced AuPd analogues wherein an induction period was observed prior to crotonaldehyde formation [52]. Scott proposed two possible selox mechanisms for the sequentially reduced AuPd bimetallic catalyst prepared from a Pd(II) salt in the presence of crotyl alcohol (Fig. 29.5) : one, a redox route in which Pd 2+ species are stoichiometrically reduced by crotyl alcohol to deposit Pd metal on to preformed Au colloids coincident with crotonaldehyde formation, with reduced Pd surface atoms subsequently re-oxidised into solution by molecular O 2 to establish a catalytic redox pathway; second an entirely heterogeneous pathway in which electron deficient surface Pd atoms extracts a β-hydrogen from adsorbed crotyl alcohol to form crotonaldehyde and Pd-H, with dissociatively adsorbed oxygen serving as a hydride scavenger to produce water. In situ Pd L III -edge XANES showed no evidence for oxidation state changes in the preformed Pd shell/Au core system following introduction of oxygen to the crotyl alcohol reaction mixture [53], suggesting that gold hinders dissolution/oxidation of catalytically active surface palladium atoms, and discounting the redox mechanism.

Selective Hydrogenation
Catalytic hydrogenation of organic compounds possessing multiple unsaturated bonds such as α,β-unsaturated aldehydes is particularly challenging [54][55][56][57], necessitating active sites able to discriminate closely related moieties, and in some instances achieve preferential activation of a more thermodynamically stable function. Noble metals are widely employed in heterogeneous catalytic hydrogenation, able to reduce a plethora of functional groups, including C¼C [58], CC [59], C¼O [60], CN [61], NO 2 [62] and aromatics [63] with molecular hydrogen. The selective hydrogenation of allylic and benzylic aldehydes to unsaturated alcohols (i.e. the reverse chemistry to that described in Sect. 29.2.1) is a commercially important industrial process widely utilised within the flavour and fragrance, agrochemical and pharmaceutical sectors [55,64]; however, the development of requisite heterogeneous catalysts has been hindered by the thermodynamic stability of C¼O relative to C¼C bonds and lack of insight into fundamental structurefunction relations [55]. Pt L III -edge and Co K-edge XANES and EXAFS studies of Pt-Co nanoparticles supported on sub-bituminous carbon for the liquid-phase hydrogenation of citral reveal strong perturbation of the Pt chemical environment and electronic properties, due to electron transfer from cobalt to platinum and the presence of alloyed bimetallic Pt-Co particles (Fig. 29.6) [65]. Bimetallic Pt-Co/C catalysts exhibited superior activity and selectivity to their monometallic Pt/C and XAS measurements have also proven valuable in elucidating particle size and composition effects in the selective hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde, an aromatic allylic alcohol widely used in fragrances and flavourings over PtRu bimetallic nanoparticles dispersed on carbon nanotubes [66]. Thermal pretreatments enhanced both hydrogenation rates and selectivity towards the desired cinnamyl alcohol product, as a result of two distinct structural changes. Ex situ Pt L III -edge and Ru K-edge XANES and EXAFS evidenced Pt-Ru intermixing after annealing under an inert atmosphere at 973 K to form a Ru-rich surface alloy (Fig. 29.7), delivering superior selectivity, while particle sintering >1123 K and the concomitant removal of oxygenates from the carbon nanotube surface promoted cinnamaldehyde adsorption, surface diffusion and activation over the resultant alloy. Liquid phase  [66] cinnamaldehyde hydrogenation over silica supported Co-Pt and Cu-Pt bimetallic catalysts reveals similar behaviour, with Pt L III -edge XANES and EXAFS evidencing the presence of reduced platinum and the formation of bimetallic bonds respectively, resulting in higher hydrogenation activity than monometallic counterparts, with Co-Pt system offering higher selectivity to C¼O hydrogenation than Cu-Pt. [67] Ex situ EXAFS has also proven useful in identifying the active species within Sn-modified SiO 2 -coated Pt catalysts for hydrogenation of crotonaldehyde, an aliphatic analogue of cinnamaldehyde, to crotyl alcohol [68]. The synthetic strategy enabled Pt nanoparticles to be spatially isolated from the Sn promoter via a porous silica layer, with Sn K-edge EXAFS evidencing SnO 2 nanoparticles, which decorated the external silica and were responsible for selectively activating the carbonyl function; spillover of atomic hydrogen, remotely dissociated at separate Pt nanoparticles which are only accessible by molecular hydrogen, drives C¼O hydrogenation at SnO 2 . Acrolein, the simplest allylic aldehyde, has also been selectively hydrogenated over Ag/SiO 2 catalysts, in which Ag K-edge XANES and EXAFS measurements revealed a strong size dependence of the Turnover Frequency (TOF) for hydrogenation, and selectivity to allyl alcohol versus propanal: [69] larger 9 nm particles possessed a higher density of Ag(111) sites which were likely responsible for selective hydrogenation of the carbonyl.
Biomass derived chemicals are of great current academic and industrial interest due to their potential in sustainable manufacturing [70], with furfural identified as a key platform chemical for the production of both advanced biofuels and furanbased chemicals and solvents such as furfuryl alcohol and tetrahydrofuran [71]. The direct liquid phase hydrogenation of furfural to furfuryl alcohol was investigated over multimetallic Cu:Zn:Cr:Zr based catalysts prepared via co-precipitation [36]. Cu K-edge XANES (Fig. 29.8) demonstrated that the excellent activity and 96 % chemoselectivity to the desired furfuryl alcohol arose from the presence of metallic copper crystallites, whose dispersion was enhanced by the presence of Zn promoter.
5-Hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) is another important biomass platform chemical, whose hydrogenation to 2,5-dimethylfuran (DMF) is an attractive route to high Fig. 29.8 Cu K-edge XANES of active metallic Cu species within multimetallic catalyst for the selective hydrogenation of furfural to furfuryl alcohol [36] energy density liquid transportation biofuels [37]. Bimetallic PdAu/C catalysts show promise for this reaction at atmospheric hydrogen pressure under acidic conditions, which XANES and EXAFS indicate is due to charge transfer from Pd!Au within bimetallic nanoparticles (Fig. 29.9) [72]. However, EXAFS analysis was unable to differentiate between cluster-in-cluster, Au core/Pd-shell or random homogeneous alloy nanostructures, hence it was not possible to determine whether the enhanced selectivity observed relative to monometallic counterparts reflected a purely electronic effect, or whether geometric considerations, such as different active surface ensembles and hence adsorption modes, may also have contributed to this promotion. Surprisingly there was little dependence of either HMF conversion or DMF selectivity upon bimetal composition, suggesting a common surface phase (and hence preferential surface segregation).
Partial hydrogenation of alkynes is an essential step in the petrochemical processing of alkenes for the polymer industry, in which traces of co-produced alkynes which are poisonous to downstream polymerisation catalysts must be removed via front-and/or tail-end catalytic partial hydrogenation to additional alkene [73]. Front-end hydrogenation utilises excess hydrogen and can therefore cause over hydrogenation of alkynes to alkanes [74]. Palladium is the metal of choice for such partial alkyne hydrogenations; however, the nature of the active phase is hotly debated due to possible hydrogen and carbon dissolution into the metal, and resultant hydride and carbide formation. Tew and co-workers explored the role of bulk and subsurface species in the flow partial (and total) hydrogenation of 1-pentyne in situ Pd K-and L III -edge XAS under excess hydrogen [75]. Pd K-edge XANES and EXAFS of silica supported nanoparticles under H 2 evidenced a reversible 1.8 % lattice expansion at 40 C consistent with bulk Pd-H formation. Exposure to pure 1-pentyne at 40 C also evidenced lattice expansion and Pd-C scatterers for small Pd nanoparticles consistent with bulk Pd carbide formation, although larger nanoparticles only evidenced a carbide overlayer. Palladium hydride was unstable under simulated H 2 /1-pentyne mixtures, in contrast to

PdAu alloy particles-supported carbon catalyst
Fig. 29.9 HMF selective hydrogenation to DMF over PdAu/C bimetallic catalysts at atmospheric pressure [72] a carbide-like phase which was observed for all particle sizes (Fig. 29.10), albeit suppressed at 100 C and H 2 :1-pentyne ¼ 10. This palladium carbide phase remained stable during reaction, and was only partially decomposed even under pure hydrogen [75].
Bimetallic silica supported AgPd catalysts, possessing only ppm levels of Pd, have also been developed for the selective hydrogenation of acetylene in an ethylene-rich stream [76]. Pd K-edge XANES of AgPd 0.01 /SiO 2 indicated charge transfer from silver to Pd, evidencing a direct bimetal interaction, consistent with the formation of a Ag alloyed Pd single-atom system visualised by HAADF-STEM and implicated by CO DRIFTS. Microcalorimetry and XANES measurements suggest that the exceptional activity and selectivity of these catalysts arises from unique Pd single atom sites distributed within a silver surface alloy which facilitates facile acetylene hydrogenation and subsequent rapid desorption of the resulting weakly bound ethylene product (Fig. 29.11).
Aromatic amines are widely used as intermediates in the synthesis of dyes, pigments, agrochemicals, and pharmaceuticals, with the primary anilines most commonly produced via the selective reduction of nitroarenes [77] employing stoichiometric reduction procedures or homogeneous Fe based catalysts in acidic media [78], which afford poor atom efficiencies, generating significant waste and hence low E-factors. While the application of heterogeneous Au catalysts in hydrogenation is limited due to their low activity, they can offer unique hydrogenation selectivity. Ca ´rdenas-Lizana et al. therefore investigated the catalytic gas phase hydrogenation of 1,3-dinitrobenzene (or 1,3,5-trinitrobenzene) over a Au-Ni/ Al 2 O 3 bimetallic catalyst, and both monometallic analogues [79]. Au L III -edge XANES and EXAFS of the bimetallic system indicated either the co-existence of supported Au and Ni metal nanoparticles with significant interfacial contact, or surface decoration of Ni particles by Au. The resulting structural and electronic perturbation favoured both partial and complete ÀNO 2 reduction to 1,3-nitroaniline (or 3,5-dinitroaniline) and 1,3-phenylenediamine (or 1,3,5-triaminobenzene), in Fig. 29.10 Pd phase transitions in response to environmental composition; hydride formation under pure hydrogen, and subsequent conversion to a bulk carbide during the selective hydrogenation of 1-pentyne [75] contrast to pure Au and pure Ni which promoted selective and total nitro reduction respectively. Weak Ni-O bonds observed by Ni K-edge EXAFS were attributed to the interaction of metallic nickel within small Ni particles with the alumina support.
Nitrobenzene hydrogenation was studied over Au/CeO 2 catalysts within a bespoke autoclave reactor modified for simultaneous HERFD XAS and ATR-FTIR spectroscopies (Fig. 29.12) in order to follow the evolution of electronic and geometric properties during the liquid phase reaction [80]. Since heterogeneous metal catalysts are often reduced in situ prior to their application in organic synthesis, the impact of solvent selection upon the reduction of cationic gold deposited from HAuCl 4 via precipitated on to a ceria support was examined via Au L III -edge HERFD XAS under 10 bar H 2 at 60 C. Reduction of Au 3+ to Au 0 was slow in cyclohexane or tetrahydrofuran, but rapid in isopropanol or toluene, although the kinetics of this process did not correlate H 2 solubility or solvent polarity and may reflect differences in the degree of catalyst suspension. ATR-FTIR showed that nitrobenzene hydrogenation proceeded by a stepwise  [80] mechanism via an azoxybenzene intermediate, with HERFD XAS demonstrating that metallic gold was the catalytically active species throughout the hydrogenation pathway to aniline.
Particle size and support effects have also been explored in nitrobenzene hydrogenation over gold nanoparticles on alumina and titania supports employing in situ Au L III -edge HERFD XAS [81]. Catalysts prepared by deposition-precipitation contained pure Au 3+ species, which underwent rapid reduction to metallic Au nanoparticles under 10 bar H 2 at temperature >60 C (Fig. 29.13). Hydrogen treatment of gold precursors on alumina at 60 C lead to incomplete reduction, with the resulting cationic gold materials exhibiting poor activity for nitrobenzene hydrogenation, likely due to their inability to activate molecular hydrogen. In contrast, cationic gold reduction was rapid during nitrobenzene hydrogenation under 10 bar H 2 resulting in larger catalytically inactive gold particles; Au/Al 2 O 3 activity correlated with the fraction of <2 nm metallic gold nanoparticles.

Carbon-Carbon Coupling
Aryl-aryl and heteroaryl C-C bond-forming reactions are some of the most important in modern synthetic chemistry, underpinning the construction of complex molecules from simple precursors, with applications in materials science, synthetic biology, and notably pharmaceutical drug manufacture [82]. Although transition metal homogeneous catalysts, notably palladium complexes [83], have dominated this synthetic landscape for decades, many recent studies have implicated surface reactions over nanoparticles in the catalytic cycle [84] and hence the relative contributions of homogeneous versus heterogeneous catalysed C-C couplings have been the subject of in situ XAS investigations.
Ellis et al. employed operando time-resolved Pd K-edge XAS to elucidate the catalytically active species in the Suzuki cross-coupling of iodonanisole and phenylboronic acid by size-controlled, PVP-stabilised Pd nanoparticles [85]. TOF analysis implicated low-coordination surface defects as the active sites for crosscoupling. The time-invariant average Pd-Pd coordination number of 1.8 nm nanoparticles revealed that they were extremely stable under reaction conditions, undergoing neither sintering nor dissolution (Fig. 29.14), as confirmed by highresolution TEM, which showed no size or shape changes between as-synthesised and post-reaction nanoparticles. Ex situ Pd K-edge XANES was also used to show that nanoporous silicas were ill-suited to the selective trapping of soluble Pd species, and that trapping protocols employing them could not therefore readily distinguish heterogeneous from homogeneous catalysis. Surface Pd defect sites were therefore directly implicated in the catalytic cycle, consistent with complementary kinetics studies which demonstrated key differences in the   [85,86] reaction order between condensed and mononuclear Pd species, and in vacuo temperature programmed desorption studies of bromobenzene homo-coupling over a Pd (111) model single crystal catalyst surface [86]. Palladium speciation from Pd(OAc) 2 , pertinent to the ligandless Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling of 4-chlorobromobenzene and 4-fluorophenylboronic acid, has also be studied via Pd K-edge EXAFS of the parent solid acetate, and after its dissolution in toluene or DMF. [87] Acetate monomers and Pd 3 (OAc) 6 trimers were observed in solution, with trimer dissociation to the monomer favoured by more polar solvents, and subsequent reduction by 4-fluorophenylboronic acid inducing rapid genesis of catalytically active Pd(0) low nuclearity clusters. Spatiotemporal variations in the distribution of palladium species arising from commercial Pd/Al 2 O 3 and Pd Encat™ 30NP catalysts were also explored via Pd K-edge XAS by Hii et al. during the Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling of 2-bromoanisole and 4-fluorophenylboronic acid within a plug-flow reactor [88]. Exposure to hot ethanol induced palladium reduction and dissolution for Pd/Al 2 O 3 , whereas Pd Encat™ 30NP proved more stable. Leached palladium redeposited downstream of the catalyst bed predominantly in metallic form.
Reimann et al. also used in situ Pd K-edge XANES measurements to monitor the oxidation state of palladium during the enantioselective allylic alkylation of (E)-1,3-diphenylallyl acetate over a commercial Pd/Al 2 O 3 catalyst in the presence of a chiral BINAP modifier [89]. Oxidised Pd in the fresh catalyst was efficiently reduced by THF and dioxane solvents, and the sodium dimethyl malonate nucleophile, stabilising palladium against leaching. Introduction of the bulky BINAP modifier retarded initial reduction of the surface oxide, although subsequent catalyst reduction was accompanied by oxidation of BINAP. Leaching of oxidised Pd 2+ species was suppressed under an inert atmosphere. Halogenated solvents favoured palladium leaching and the formation of soluble compounds, opening up the possibility of competing homogeneous pathways. Grunwaldt and co-workers subsequently utilised Pd K-edge Quick scanning extended X-ray absorption fine structure (QEXAFS) to gain insight into Heck coupling of bromobenzene with styrene over the same commercial Pd/Al 2 O 3 catalyst. [90] XANES and EXAFS evidenced the formation of 2 nm Pd colloids (soluble, but offering heterogeneous reaction sites) during reaction, coincident with bromobenzene conversion. Deactivation coincided with pronounced changes in the EXAFS spectra attributed to the formation of mono-and dinuclear bromo-palladate complexes in the solution phase (Fig. 29.15) accompanied by sintering of the supported Pd nanoparticles.
Bimetallic Au alloyed Pd single atoms supported on an anion-exchange resin have been investigated for the Ullmann reaction of diverse (including deactivated) aryl halides to produce biphenyls in aqueous media [91]. Ex situ Pd K-Edge and Au L III -edge EXAFS, in conjunction with CO DRIFTS, revealed the disruption of Pd ensembles with increasing Au:Pd molar ratios, resulting in the isolation of individual Pd atoms in a random substitutional alloy. The resulting Pd single atom alloy catalysts were extremely active in the Ulmann reaction of aryl chlorides, with TONs increasing exponentially with decreasing Pd concentration. Cu-catalysed C-C couplings have been less studied, although a recent in situ XAS investigation of the reaction between aryl iodide add acetylacetone catalysed by high CuI loadings identified the formation of Cu(acac)2 and metallic Cu through reaction with the β-diketone [92]. However, in the presence of PPh 3 ligands Cu K-edge in situ XANES/EXAFS evidenced a Cu(acac)(PPh 3 ) 2 complex as the active catalyst in this CÀC coupling reaction, which deactivates through disproportionation to Cu 2+ /Cu 0 spectator species.

Conclusions
X-ray absorption spectroscopy has proved an invaluable tool for catalytic scientists over many decades in characterising the structure and electronic properties of heterogeneous (and homogeneous) catalyst components. Recent advances in the design of synchrotron optics, high sensitivity and dispersive detectors, and innovative reactor cells permitting for example flow operation, multi-phase reactions and coupling to additional analytical tools for multi-dimensional experiments, in conjunction with wider access to high energy synchrotron radiation sources, now provide opportunities for investigating the nature of active species and mechanistic pathways of working catalysts for diverse green chemical transformations. However, a number of challenges remain. Further improvements in the spatial resolution of XAS methods are necessary to permit more detailed mapping of the distribution of catalyst components across packed beds in flow reactors (micron-scale) and individual catalyst particles (1-100 nm scale); this is essential in order to better discriminate and quantify leaching of active metal components and synergies between different bimetal and/or support functions in multifunctional catalysts respectively. A shorter time resolution for spectral acquisition (1 ns-1 ms) will also help to discriminate the relative roles of spectator and active catalyst species, and identify short-lived reactive intermediates, thus providing hitherto unparalleled insight into catalyst transition states and factors influencing competing reaction pathways. Both these goals will only be possible through complementary enhancements in detector sensitivity, permitting the identification and quantification of all catalyst components at all stages of the individual catalytic cycle and overall process operation (down to ppb-ppm concentration) in order to correlate structural and kinetics measurements. In summary, XAS has to date helped shed invaluable insight into the nature of the catalytically active species participating in oxidation, hydrogenation and coupling reactions which underpin the valorisation of petrochemical and renewable chemical feedstocks, to elucidate key deactivation pathways, and to help optimise the formulation of bimetallic catalysts and reactor operating conditions.

Chapter 30
Environmental Catalysts Kazuhiko Dohmae

Introduction
It is well known that gasoline engines emit several pollutants as the result of fuel combustion, including carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and hydrocarbons (HC). These harmful gases were recognized as a serious problem for the environments beginning in the 1960s, and various laws obligating automobile manufacturers to drastically reduce pollutants in exhaust, including the Muskie Act in the United States, were enacted in many countries in the 1970s. In order to solve this problem, three-way catalysts capable of converting toxic gases into harmless compounds were put into practical use in 1977, and these systems are now employed in almost all gasoline engine vehicles. In such compounds, a monolithic honeycomb is coated with a powdered catalyst, which typically consists of precious metal particles such as platinum (Pt), rhodium (Rh), and palladium (Pd) dispersed on a metal oxide support.
To allow the practical application of three-way catalysts, it is important to maintain the air to fuel (A/F) ratio in the engine inlet gas within an ideal range, and this can be accomplished by advanced electronics and oxygen sensors. It is also vital to disperse the precious metals on the support as infinitesimal particles to achieve high catalytic performance. Analysis of the dispersion state of precious metals and measurements of particle sizes may be performed via electron microscopy, while elemental identification is accomplished by X-ray diffraction and chemical states are analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) analysis of catalysts has become increasingly common as K. Dohmae (*) Materials Analysis & Evaluation Dept., Toyota Central R&D Labs. Inc., 480-1192 Japan e-mail: kdohmae@mosk.tytlabs.co.jp the use of synchrotron radiation has been more widely adopted. In recent years, XAFS has become an indispensable technique in catalyst analysis because of its ability to determine both the local structure and the chemical state of each element and to readily perform in situ analyses.

EXAFS Analysis of the Local Structure of CeO 2 -ZrO 2 Oxide
Automotive three-way catalysts are able to eliminate CO, NOx, and HC from exhaust gases only under stoichiometric conditions, meaning that the A/F ratio of the gases being introduced to the engine must be approximately 14.6. Because it is difficult to accurately supply the correct amount of fuel to maintain an ideal A/F ratio, in practice the composition of the inlet gases actually fluctuates around the stoichiometric ratio. In such cases, the catalyst often does not function efficiently, depending only on the catalytic activity of the noble metals employed. For this reason, three-way catalysts contain a promoter having a suitable oxygen storage/ release capacity (OSC) in order to maintain stoichiometric conditions in the vicinity of the catalyst. Ceria-based oxides are widely used as promoters due to the high OSC efficiency of these materials based on the reversible redox reaction CeO 2 $ CeO 2-x þ (x/2)O 2 (x ¼ 0 to 0.5). It has been demonstrated that the addition of ZrO 2 to CeO 2 enhances the OSC of the promoter and also improves its thermal stability [1][2][3], and so CeO 2 -ZrO 2 has been widely utilized for many three-way catalysts. Nagai et al. clarified the relationship between the OSC and the local structure of CeO 2 -ZrO 2 using XAFS analysis [4].
In their study, Ce K-edge (40.5 keV) extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) has been applied to the analysis of the cation-cation (cation ¼ Ce, Zr) network as well as the oxygen environment in CeO 2 -ZrO 2 . In the past, Ce L 3 -edge (5.7 keV) EXAFS was utilized for CeO 2 -ZrO 2 analysis [5,6]. However, the usable electron wavenumber (k) region of Ce L 3 -edge EXAFS is limited to the range of approximately 3 to 9 Å À1 due to the presence of the Ce L 2 -edge (6.2 keV), even though the Ce and Zr contributions to the EXAFS signals are significant in the high-K region [7].
Three types of CeO 2 -ZrO 2 compounds having the same composition but different OSC efficiencies (Ce/Zr ¼ 1; CZ55-1, CZ55-2, and CZ55-3) were prepared for this study. CZ55-1 was synthesized by precipitation with aqueous NH 3 using CeO 2 powder and an aqueous ZrO(NO 3 ) 2 solution followed by calcination in air at 500 C for 3 h. CZ55-2 was prepared by co-precipitation with aqueous NH 3 using aqueous solutions of Ce(NO 3 ) 3 and ZrO(NO 3 ) 2 and subsequent calcination in air at 500 C for 3 h. CZ55-3 was obtained using the same co-precipitation process as applied to CZ55-2, except that the dried powder was reduced at 1200 C for 4 h in CO and further oxidized in air at 500 C for 3 h. The OSC properties of these materials are summarized in Table 30.1, which shows that the OSC value increases in the order of CZ55-1 < CZ55-2 < CZ55-3. It is noteworthy that almost all of the Ce in the CZ55-3 contributes to the OSC.
Fourier transforms (FTs) of the 3-17 Å À1 regions of the Ce K-edge EXAFS spectra are presented in Fig. 30.1a. The first and second peaks at 1.8 and 3.5 Å correspond to the Ce-O and Ce-cation (cation ¼ Ce, Zr) bonds, respectively. The position and amplitude of the Ce-O peaks generated by the three materials are slightly different from one another: the magnitudes of the Ce-cation peaks of CZ55-2 and CZ55-3 are lower than that of CZ55-1. Additionally, the Ce-cation peak of CZ55-3 appears to be split in two, and the FTs of the Ce L 3 -edge of the Ce-cation peaks of CZ55-2 and CZ55-3 almost disappear due to the lack of an EXAFS signal for heavy elements in the high-k part (Fig. 30.1b). These results indicate that the acquisition of K-edge EXAFS spectra is necessary for the precise analysis of Lanthanide elements, including Ce.
Figure 30.2 shows the X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectra at the Zr K-edge. A comparison of the spectra reveals differences at the rising absorption edge (region A) and at the peak top (region B); specifically, the weak shoulder in region A is more apparent in the CZ55-1 and CZ55-2 spectra than that of CZ55-3. This pre-edge can be assigned to the absorption of the 1 s to 4d transition, which is most weak when the oxygen configuration around the Zr is The ratio of Ce 3þ /(Ce 3þ þ Ce 4þ ) under reductive condition symmetrical. In terms of this feature, the XANES spectra of CZ55-1 and CZ55-2 closely resemble that of tetragonal ZrO 2 , while the CZ55-3 spectrum matches that of cubic ZrO 2 [8]. In region B, the CZ55-1 spectrum exhibits a single broad peak, whereas CZ55-2 generates a slight splitting and CZ55-3 shows clear splitting. Similar splitting has been observed for a solid solution of Y 2 O 3 -ZrO 2 [9]. These results suggest that the degree of Ce insertion into the ZrO 2 increases in the order CZ55-1 < CZ55-2 < CZ55-3. The curve-fitting results for the cation-cation shells in the FTs of the Ce K-edge and Zr K-edge EXAFS spectra are summarized in Table 30.2. For CZ55-1, the Ce-cation shell was fitted with a single Ce-Ce bond, and the Zr-cation shell was also fitted with a single Zr-Zr bond. These results demonstrate that CZ55-1 is a mixture of pure CeO 2 and ZrO 2 . The coordination number (CN) of the Zr-Zr bond for CZ55-1 is 6.6 while that of the Ce-Ce bond is about 12, suggesting that the average crystallite size of the ZrO 2 in the CZ55-1 was small. Both Ce-Ce (Zr-Zr) and Ce-Zr (Zr-Ce) bonds were required to obtain an appropriate fit for the cationcation shell at the Ce (Zr) K-edge for CZ55-2. The CN of the Ce-Ce bond (CN ¼ 8.0) for the Ce-cation shell is larger than that of Ce-Zr bond (CN ¼ 3.6), while the CN of the Zr-Ce bond (CN ¼ 4.0) is close to that of the Ce-Zr bond. Thus, it is evident that a CeO 2 -ZrO 2 solid solution was formed in the case of CZ55-2, although Ce-rich and Zr-rich domains still remain. Finally, in the case of CZ55-3, both the Ce-cation and Zr-cation shells were fitted with same Ce and Zr CN value

XAFS Analysis of Interactions Between Supported Platinum and Support Oxides
In three-way catalysts, precious metals such as Pt, Pd and Rh are highly dispersed on the support oxides as small particles only several nanometers in diameter.
Exposing the catalyst to high temperatures (~800 C and above) agglomerates and sinters the precious metals, decreasing their active surface area. [10][11][12][13] The decreased efficiency caused by sintering of the precious metals is one factor that can degrade the effectiveness of three-way catalysts and, as such, is a crucial issue that  Figure 30.5a shows the Pt L 3 -edge XANES spectra obtained from the aged catalysts as well as those of reference samples. The absorption peak at approximately 11.57 keV is referred to as the "white line," and its intensity reflects the degree of vacancy in the 5d orbitals of the Pt atoms, such that a greater extent of Pt oxidation results in a more intense line. Here the white line intensity of the Pt/Al 2 O 3 is equal to that of Pt foil, suggesting that the Pt on the Al 2 O 3 was in a metallic state after aging. In contrast, the white line intensity of the Pt/CZY is similar to that of PtO 2 , so that the Pt on CZY was evidently oxidized to Pt 2þ or Pt 4þ species. was different from those of both Pt foil and PtO 2 ; the first neighboring peak is found at 2.02 Å in the FT of Pt/CZY but at 2.04 Å for PtO 2 . These peaks were assigned to Pt-O bonds. The second neighboring peak in the FT of Pt/CZY was found at 3.01 Å, which is below that of PtO 2 . Figure 30.5c shows the curve fitting results for the second peak of Pt/CZY, based on the supposition that the second neighboring atom was Ce or Pt. It is evident that there is excellent agreement between the experimental and simulation results for Ce, although appropriate fitting could not be obtained for Pt. Curve fitting analyses for the second neighboring atoms, Zr and Y, were also conducted, but again appropriate results could not be obtained. From these results it is concluded that the second neighboring element of the Pt in Pt/CZY is Ce and that the Pt supported on CZY forms Pt-O-Ce bonds during aging at 800 C. The CN of the Pt-Ce bond was determined to be 3.5, a relatively small value compared to that of 12.0 derived for the cubic fluorite structure. This result suggests that the Pt on the CZY support is highly dispersed and also present on the surface of the CZY.
The findings of this study indicate that the Pt supported on CZY interacts with the Ce in the same support and forms Pt-O-Ce bonds at high temperatures under an oxidizing atmosphere, resulting in less sintering of the Pt particles. Since the Pt supported on Al 2 O 3 does not undergo sufficient interaction to form Pt-support bonds and is able to diffuse on the support, it undergoes aggregation into Pt particles.

Operando XAFS Analysis of the Pt/Al 2 O 3 Catalyst
The operando spectroscopic method was recently introduced in catalysis research [19][20][21][22][23][24]. This technique allows the spectroscopic investigation of the catalyst during the actual reaction, with simultaneous assessments of activity, selectivity and stability. Since the catalytic reaction efficiency is affected by the state of the catalyst, such as the oxidation state of the supported metal, the surface structure and the surface composition, this operando approach is a very powerful technique for understanding the relationship between the state of the catalyst and the catalytic efficiency under working conditions. Recently, high speed XAFS has been made available as the result of the high intensity X-rays being generated in synchrotron radiation facilities [25,26]. With these advanced techniques, it is possible to observe dynamic changes in the catalyst throughout the reaction using timeresolved XAFS experiments. This makes XAFS a very powerful tool for the analysis of automotive catalysts because reaction conditions are always transient during the operation of a motor vehicle. This section reports the results of operando experiments using the XAFS technique to study Pt-supported catalysts during the oxidation of C 3 H 6 [19].
In order to perform operando XAFS analysis, both in situ XAFS instrumentation and a system to evaluate catalytic activity are required. Figure 30.6 shows a diagram of the operando XAFS analysis system used by Tanabe et al., consisting of a transmission XAFS cell, a gas generator to supply reaction gases to the cell and a quadrupole mass spectrometer to evaluate the effluent gas coming from the cell. In the experiments, a catalyst composed of Pt (1 wt%) supported on Al 2 O 3 was used. The catalyst sample was first formed into a disk and placed in the in situ cell, after which it was reduced in 3 % H 2 in He followed by oxidized in 20 % O 2 in He at 500 C as a pretreatment. After the pretreatment, the flow was switched so as to supply the reaction gas (0.6 % O 2 and 0.1 % C 3 H 6 in He) at room temperature and the sample was heated to 500 C at 10 C/min. During this temperature ramp, XANES spectra were recorded at one minute intervals and the catalytic reaction was monitored at one second intervals by measuring the concentrations of effluent gases. Figure 30.7 presents the changes in the Pt L 3 -edge XANES spectra during the temperature ramp. Following the oxidizing pretreatment at 500 C, a strong white line corresponding to oxidized Pt is observed at the beginning of the reaction. The white line intensity decreases as the temperature increases up to 200 C, meaning that some portion of the oxidized Pt was reduced during the reaction even under oxidizing conditions. The white line intensity then begins to increase above 200 C, indicating reoxidation of the Pt. The fraction of oxidized Pt could be estimated from the white line intensity, based on the assumption of a linear trend between the oxidation states of PtO 2 and Pt foil, representing 100 % and 0 % oxidized, Figure 30.8 shows the overall operando results, plotted as the fraction of metallic Pt and the C 3 H 6 conversion (chosen as an indicator of the catalytic activity) vs. temperature. The temperature range can be divided into three regions, as indicted in the figure. In region I, the oxidized Pt is reduced gradually without any catalytic C 3 H 6 conversion, while in region II the Pt is reduced along with increasing catalytic conversion. In region III, the Pt is reoxidized while the catalytic conversion increases as the temperature is increased. Figure 30.9 provides diagrams of the proposed mechanisms corresponding to each temperature region.
In region I, the fraction of metallic Pt increases, although no C 3 H 6 conversion is observed. This suggests a self-poisoning effect during the C 3 H 6 -O 2 reaction over the Pt surface, through preferential adsorption of C 3 H 6 instead of O 2 on the Pt surfaces. Although the adsorbed C 3 H 6 is expected to reduce the oxidized Pt, no catalytic reaction is observed because the temperature is not high enough to break the C-C bonds of the adsorbed C 3 H 6 . In region II, some conversion of C 3 H 6 is observed and the conversion rate increases as the temperature is increased. The reaction in this region is believed to be controlled by the number of the active sites, because the conversion of C 3 H 6 is below 30 %. The surface area covered by metallic Pt therefore appears to be associated with the extent of the catalytic reaction. In region III, the metallic Pt fraction decreases with increasing temperature. In contrast, the conversion of C 3 H 6 steadily increases to over 30 % in this region, and hence, the area covered by metallic Pt evidently does not completely correlate with the progression of the catalytic reaction. Therefore, the presence of a certain amount of the metallic Pt appears to promote the catalytic reaction, although there are apparently other factors involved. The loss of metallic Pt in region III is believed to occur through oxidation by residual oxygen following the conversion reaction, as shown in Fig. 30.9.
The operando analysis in this work allowed assessments of the oxidation state of Pt in the catalyst and its effect on the activation process. These studies demonstrated that the early stage of the catalytic activation consists of a combination of the creation of active sites and a catalytic reaction over these sites. This result indicates that the formation of metallic Pt sites and the activation of adsorbed species on Pt are both important to the progression of the catalytic reaction at low temperatures. More generally, this project has also shown that operando spectroscopy is a very useful technique for understanding the behavior of automotive catalysts.

Chapter 31
Solid-Liquid Interfaces Takuya Masuda, Toshihiro Kondo, and Kohei Uosaki

Introduction
The structural study at solid-liquid interfaces, i.e., electrode-electrolyte interfaces, is one of the key targets not only of fundamental surface science but also of various applied sciences such as fuel cells, sensors, and batteries, because many important processes, such as adsorption/desorption, solvation/desolvation, and the electrode reaction itself, take place at the electrode-electrolyte interfaces. It is essential to clarify the electronic and geometric structures at these interfaces with atomic dimensions, in situ, and in real time [1][2][3]. Various surface analysis methods, such as scanning electron and transmission electron microscopies (SEM and TEM, respectively), low-energy electron diffraction (LEED), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), using electrons as a probe are powerful tools to determine the surface geometric structures and/or electronic states in a vacuum. Because of their vacuum requirement, however, these methods cannot be used to study electrode-electrolyte interfaces in situ. Since the 1980s, several surface analysis methods, such as scanning probe microscopy (SPM) [4,5], surface X-ray scattering (SXS) [6,7], and nonlinear spectroscopy [8,9], have been developed to investigate the geometric structures and electronic states at electrode-electrolyte interfaces with an atomic resolution under electrochemical potential control, i.e., in situ. However, these techniques still have intrinsic limitations. SPM can determine the geometric structure with a high spatial resolution, but only of the outermost surface layer. Although SXS can determine the three-dimensional structure at electrode-electrolyte interfaces with a high spatial resolution, it is essential to use a single crystal as the electrode.
Optical spectroscopies using ultraviolet, visible, and infrared lights have a high time resolution, but not a high enough spatial resolution.
The X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) technique, as documented in the previous chapters, provides a lot of information about both the three-dimensional geometric and electronic structures at electrode-electrolyte interfaces with atomic dimensions, both in situ and in real time [1,2,6,10]. Because X-rays transmit through the electrolyte solution without any significant interactions, X-rays are considered to be an ideal probe for the structural analysis of electrode-electrolyte interfaces. In order to obtain the signal from the electrode-electrolyte interfaces with a high signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio and to use an incident X-ray source with a continuous wavelength distribution, however, in situ XAFS measurements at the electrode-electrolyte interfaces usually require synchrotron radiation light as the X-ray source.
Moreover, XAFS has the following few advantages over SPM and SXS: (1) XAFS is applicable not only to single crystal flat surfaces but also to polycrystalline surfaces and nanoparticles because it is unnecessary for this technique to use the sample with a long range order, (2) XAFS can analyze not only the local geometric structure, but also the electronic structure of the target atom, and (3) XAFS can selectively detect the signal from the target atom. Therefore, it has been utilized for a variety of electrode-electrolyte interfaces such as single-/polycrystal surfaces, thin films, and nanoparticles.
During the early stage, research studies of the electrode-electrolyte interfaces using the in situ XAFS technique focused on the adsorbed species on the electrode surface [11][12][13], surface oxide [6,[14][15][16][17][18][19][20][21], and electrodeposited metal layers on the metal [22][23][24] and semiconductor [25][26][27] electrode surfaces. The targets of the in situ XAFS studies were then expanded to a wide range of applications such as polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) [14,[28][29][30][31][32][33][34] and Li ion batteries (LIBs) [28,35]. Because the studies of PEMFCs and LIBs were summarized in detail in Chapters 22 and 23, respectively, we focus on the more fundamental systems. In this section, the experimental setups for electrode-electrolyte interfaces, which are keys for the in situ XAFS measurements, are briefly described and then the recent topics of the in situ XAFS studies, especially the structural determinations of electrodeposited metal thin films on various substrate electrodes and clarifications of the mechanism of multi-electron transfer reactions of electrocatalysts, are reviewed.

Experimental Methodology
Since XAFS is not inherently surface sensitive due to the relatively long penetration depth of the X-rays, the obtained signal is often buried within information from the bulk, which is not involved in the electrochemical reactions. Thus, various in situ electrochemical cells have been developed to selectively extract the signal from the target atom at the electrode-electrolyte interfaces. The typical configuration of the electrochemical cell for the in situ XAFS measurements in the transmission mode, as shown in Fig. 31.1, was reported in the late 1980s [14,28,36,37]. In this electrochemical cell, a thin metal layer, used as the working electrode, is deposited on the window (Mylar ® or Kapton ® film) of conventional thin layer liquid cells. This basic configuration is still widely used for various electrochemical systems [37] and these transmission cells are suitable for thin films and nanoparticlesdeposited on the electrode surface. Using a similar configuration, the membrane electrode assembly (MEA), which is constructed by binding carbon-supported catalyst layers on both sides of the electrolyte membranes, in the PEMFC was straightforwardly measured to study the reaction mechanisms [29][30][31][32][33][34].
As compared to the transmission mode, on the other hand, the fluorescence mode is more useful for in situ studies at electrode-electrolyte interfaces in the following cases: (1) the quantity of the target material is too small to detect the difference between the incident and transmitted X-ray intensities, and/or (2) the thickness of the sample is too thick for X-rays to transmit. Electrochemical cells in the thin layer configuration [11,[38][39][40], which are used for in situ SXS measurements, are also employed for in situ XAFS measurements in the fluorescence mode. Significant X-ray scattering from the electrolyte solution layer can be avoided when the thickness of the solution layer is less than several tens of μm, as shown in Fig. 31.2 [40].
This configuration can be used for the total reflection fluorescence mode, which enables the surface sensitive analysis, typically at a depth of several nm. Furthermore, since EXAFS oscillations are sensitive to the angle between the bond direction and polarization vector of the incident X-ray, polarization-dependent measurements can be performed by employing this configuration. A disadvantage of this thin-layer configuration is, however, suppression of the effective mass transfer due to the thin electrolyte layer. In order to obtain an effective mass transfer, the backside illumination fluorescence configuration was proposed [15,16]. In this configuration, a thin metal layer coated on a thin film window is used as the working electrode as in the case of the transmission cells and it is Inset: X-ray geometry and appropriate angles. The beam is incident on the sample at a grazing incidence (θ > 89 ), and the polarization of the E-vector is 15 off parallel to the surface [40] exposed to the sufficiently thick electrolyte solution layer. The backside of the working electrode (window) is irradiated by the incident X-rays and the fluorescent X-rays, which emit at the electrode-electrolyte interface, can be detected through the window. Various window materials, such as Si 3 N 4 [41], polyimide [42], poly (dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) [43], and a graphite layer peeled from highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) [44], have recently been employed for the in situ XAFS measurements in the fluorescence mode.

Topics of In Situ XAFS at Electrode/Electrolyte Interfaces

Metal Deposition on Single Crystalline Metal and Semiconductor Electrodes
Since deposition of a metal monolayer and submonolayer on a foreign metal substrate can strongly modify the reactivity and electrocatalytic activity, welldefined metal layers deposited on single crystal electrode surfaces, such as an underpotentially deposited (UPD) metal monolayer, have been investigated by various in situ techniques including SPM, SXS, and XAFS. There is an advantage of in situ XAFS over SPM and SXS for investigating electrochemically deposited metal layers; in situ XAFS can selectively probe not only the local structure, but also the oxidation state of the target atoms. Cu UPD is one of the most studied systems because Cu K-edge spectra of various Cu-based compounds are available as references. In addition, the atomic arrangement of electrodeposited Cu layers have been determined by SPM [45][46][47][48], SXS [48][49][50][51], and several optical spectroscopies [48,52]. In situ XAFS characterization of a Cu UPD layer on the Au(111) single crystal electrode was first performed by Abruña et al. [22,40]. Fitting of the EXAFS oscillation at the Cu K-edge showed that Cu atoms in the UPD monolayer exist at the three-fold hollow site of the Au( 111)-(1 Â 1) surface with a (1 Â 1) structure, and an oxygen species adsorbs on the atop site of the deposited Cu atoms. Tadjeddine et al. then systematically showed that the Cu UPD monolayer is epitaxial on the Au (111) surface and the oxidation state of Cu is close to Cu þ [23]. On the way to the formation of Cu (1 Â 1) monolayer on Au (111), the initial stable arrangement of adsorbed Cu atoms was found to be a (√3 Â √3)R30 hexagonal honeycomb arrangement [23,24,53,54]. At the potential where this Cu adatom structure forms, it was confirmed that the sulfate anion is also coadsorbed in the (√3 Â √3)R30 structure on the Au (111) surface (Fig. 31.3). This initial (√3 Â √3) structure of a ca. 0.3 monolayer became equilibrated with a c(5 Â 5) structure (Fig. 31.4) [23].
The effect of the coadsorption of a chloride anion on the structure of the Cu UPD layer on Au (111) was investigated by in situ XAFS and FEFF multiple scattering calculations by Wu et al. [55]. The in situ XAFS results showed a remarkable dichroism consistent with a bilayer in which the Cu adatoms are covered by chloride anions. Previous scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) results suggested either the (5 Â 5) structure, which is similar to that of the (111) plane of a CuCl single crystal or a (4 Â 4)-based structure [46,56,57]. From the FEEF calculations, it was concluded that there is a large degree of static disorder. An in situ XAFS study of the electrodeposited Cu monolayer and multilayer was also carried out in alkaline solution [58].
There were also many reports about the in situ XAFS analysis of electrodeposited Cu on the Pt(111) system. The effect of the halide ions on the adsorbed structure of Cu was studied by Abruña et al. [59][60][61][62]. It was concluded that at a potential of þ0.1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) corresponding to a coverage of ca. 0.75 monolayer, the electrodeposited Cu is incompletely discharged with a Cu-Cu bond length of 2.85 Å and oxygen species (from either bisulfate anion or water molecule) is present on the Cu adlayer with a Cu-O bond length of 2.16 Å in the absence of Cl À . In the presence of Cl À , on the other hand, the atomic arrangement of the electrodeposited Cu is the same as in the absence of Cl À , but no Cu-O bond is formed at the Cu adlayer, indicating that Cl À acts as a protective overlayer precluding the adsorption of oxygen species. When the fully discharged Cu is formed on the Pt(111) surface, the Cu-Cu bond distance was observed to be 2.59 Å, which is close to the bulk Cu value (2.56 Å) in the presence of Cl À . However, they did not describe in detail the Cu-Cl interaction that may be due to a low amount of and/or random orientation of the adsorbed Cl À .  [54] After the pioneering research by Abruña et al. [59][60][61][62], Soldo et al. investigated this system in detail using the fluorescence mode under grazing and normal X-ray incidence with FEFF theoretical calculations [63]. In the absence of Cl À , there is a full monolayer of oxygen atoms at the atop site of the adsorbed Cu. The Cu-Cu bond distance is 2.68 Å, which is smaller than the Pt-Pt distance of 2.77 Å, suggesting that the Cu full monolayer is composed of bidimensional domains with (1 Â 1) and three-fold hollow sites. In the presence of Cl À , the position and structure of the Cu adlayer is the same as in the absence of Cl À , but the oxygen atoms are replaced by chlorine atoms with the (√3 Â √3)R30 superstructure. These analyzed EXAFS data in the absence and presence of Cl À are summarized in Tables 31.1 and 31.2, respectively [63].
In addition to Cu on Au (111) and Pt (111), various UPD systems have been studied by in situ XAFS. In the late 1980s and 1990s, the geometric and electronic structures of electrodeposited Pb on Ag (111)  [64], Ag on Au (111)  [65], Cu on Au (100) [23,66], and Ni on Au(100) [66] were investigated. The quality of the in situ XAFS spectra have been significantly improved by the developments of the Lee et al. also performed in situ XAFS measurements of the Cu UPD monolayer formed on the Au(111) surface premodified with a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of butanethiol (BT) in the total reflection mode which enables a surfacesensitive analysis and polarization-dependent measurements by using polarized X-rays [69]. Unfortunately, the S/N ratio of the spectra collected in the s-polarization was too low to allow it to be analyzed. Analysis of the p-polarization EXAFS data indicated that the Cu ions penetrate between the SAM and Au (111) surface. The Cu adatoms exist at the face-centered cubic three-fold hollow sites of the Au( 111)-(1 Â 1) surface. No information about Cu-Cu bond was obtained because it should be parallel to the surface and because the EXAFS oscillation at the K-edge is polarization sensitive (Fig. 31.6).
Structure analyzes of the electrodeposited metal layer on a semiconductor electrode were also reported. We investigated the local structures of electrodeposited Cu on p-GaAs(100) with various coverages by in situ XAFS [25][26][27]. In all the coverage ranges, fully discharged Cu nanoclusters formed on the p-GaAs(100) surface, but the length of Cu-Cu bond was dependent on the Cu nanocluster size. When the coverage is more than a 0.25 monolayer, the length of Cu-Cu bond is 2.56 Å, which is the same as that of the bulk Cu. When the coverage is less than a 0.25 monolayer, however, the bond length is shorter than that of the bulk Cu.

Metal Deposition on Polycrystalline Electrode and Nanoparticle Surfaces
Because XAFS can analyze the local structure not only of the single crystal electrode but also of the polycrystal, there were several structural studies of electrodeposited metal layers on polycrystal electrode and nanoparticle surfaces.   (111) surface [68] monolayer on the polycrystalline Pt electrode by in situ XAFS [70,71]. The difference in the EXAFS spectra between the s-and p-polarizations showed that the surface has not reconstructed to the extent of eliminating the original surface plane. The distance from the Cu adatoms to oxygen, Pt, and Cu atoms are 2.06 Å, 2.58 Å, and 2.62 Å, respectively. From the point of view of corrosion/inhibition, Seo et al. studied the structure of the electrodeposited Pb [72] and Sn [73] on Ni polycrystalline electrodes by in situ XAFS. In the case of Pb, at the potential more positive than À0.245 V (vs. SHE), which is the equilibrium potential of Pb, the XANES spectrum showed that the electrodeposited Pb is metallic, indicating the UPD Pb on the Ni surface. EXAFS data showed that the Pb-Ni bond length is 2.64 Å, which is significantly shorter than that (3.00 Å) calculated from the radii of the bulk Pb and Ni, suggesting that the Pb-Ni bond is covalent. The EXAFS results also suggested the coexistence of the surface alloy phase. In the case of Sn, electrodeposited Sn atoms are substituted at the fcc sites in the first Ni layer with the Sn-Ni bond distance of 2.55À2.57 Å and an oxygen species is adsorbed on the substituted Sn with a bond length of 2.03À2.04 Å. This structure is independent of the Ni electrode potential. A relatively short Sn-O bond suggests the formation of a strong covalent bond of Sn-Ni like a surface alloy. The adsorption of oxygen species on the Sn atoms in addition to the strong covalent bond of Sn-Ni prevents the anodic stripping of the Sn UPD layer, indicating a strong inhibition effect of Sn on the aqueous corrosion of Ni. A significant number of in situ XAFS studies on the metal nanoparticle surfaces have been carried out because of their potential applications for electrocatalysts. Especially, metal deposited nanoparticles are the most studied system in conjunction with PEMFCs [14,[28][29][30][31][32][33][34].
McBreen and coworkers investigated the geometric and electronic structures of electrodeposited Cu [22] and Pb [74] on the carbon-supported Pt surface. In the case of Cu, the Cu K-edge XANES spectrum showed that the electrodeposited Cu has an oxidation state close to Cu þ and a tetrahedral coordination for the electrodeposited Cu species. Pt L III -edge XANES spectrum showed a partial filling of the d-band vacancies of Pt upon the adsorption of Cu. Electrodeposited Cu þ species are apparently associated with the sulfate anion when used as an electrolyte, which is the same feature as Cu UPD on Pt (111)  [59][60][61][62][63]. Recently, Jia et al. investigated the electrodeposition of Cu on carbon-supported Pt nanoparticles over the potential range of the PEMFC operation and explored the poisoning effects of Cu on both the oxygen reduction and hydrogen oxidation [75]. In the case of Pb, the XANES spectra showed that the oxidation state of the Pb UPD layers is essentially zero but the oxidation state is þ2 in the potential region more positive than the main UPD peak in the cyclic voltammogram (CV). These features are the same as the Pb electrodeposited on the Ni polycrystalline electrode [72]. EXAFS oscillation was fitted on the basis of a two-shell fit (Pt-Pb and Pb-Pb) in the potential region more negative than the second UPD peak (5 UPD peaks were observed between 0.4 V and À0.3 V) in the CV, indicating the formation of Pb and Pt in this potential region. However, the EXAFS oscillation was fitted to a simple single Pb-Pt coordination shell in this potential region, indicating a high degree of lateral disorder in the electrodeposited Pb layer. There is no interaction of Pb with oxygen species in the UPD region.
In order to clarify the origin of the difference in the electrocatalytic activities for the methanol oxidation between the UPD Sn on the carbon-supported Pt and carbon-supported SnPt alloy, in situ XAFS measurements were carried out by McBreen and Mukerjee [76]. In the SnPt alloy, alloying with Sn causes partial filling of the d band vacancies of Pt and an extension of the Pt-Pt bond from 2.77 to 2.8 Å. For the UPD Sn, on the other hand, Pt is not structurally and electronically affected by the formation of the Sn UPD layer (Fig. 31.7). In the entire potential range, the surface Sn atoms are associated with oxygen species and the nature and strength of the Sn-O bonds are varied by the applied potential. They concluded that the differences in the electrocatalytic activity of the two catalysts for methanol oxidation are due to the effects of alloying on the electronic structure of Pt that inhibit the ability of the Pt to adsorb methanol and dissociate C-H bonds.
In order to study the effect of Ru modification on the carbon monoxide tolerance to the Pt catalyst for the PEMFCs, the geometric and electronic structures of Ru-modified carbon-supported Pt were investigated by in situ XAFS [77][78][79][80][81][82][83][84][85]. Ramaker et al. carried out a series of in situ XAFS studies on carbon-supported Pt n Ru, Pt n Mo, and PtSn electrocatalysts [79][80][81][82][83]. Based on the potential dependent coverages of CO, OH, and H adsorbed on Pt, which were determined by the Δμ analysis of the Pt L II -and L III -edges XANES spectra in combination with a FEFF simulation, they discussed the metal-ligand effects on the electrocatalytic activity for CO oxidation. It was shown that Mo and Sn islands on PtMo and PtSn are fully oxidized over a wide potential region in contrast to the fact that the oxidation state of Ru on PtRu depends on the applied potential. The Pt-OH bond and Pt-CO bond strengthen and weaken, respectively, depending on the strength of the ligand effect; Ru < MoO n % SnO n < RuO n . Thus, a strong ligand effect is exerted at all potentials for PtMo and PtSn although it significantly depends on the potential only for PtRu.
Pelliccione et al. structurally and electronically studied Pt nanoparticles with and without electrodeposited Ru layers [84]. A significant differences were found in the oxidation state of catalyst in the absence and presence of methanol in the electrolyte solution. In the absence of methanol, Ru was gradually oxidized from metallic to a Ru 3þ /Ru 4þ mixture as potential was made more positive. In the presence of methanol, however, the oxidation state of Ru remains a mixture of metallic and Ru 3þ even as potential was made more positive. Carbon monoxide species were found to be adsorbed on the Ru atoms in the entire potential region and the OH species start to coadsorb when the potential was made more positive than 0.175 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), at which the methanol oxidation starts. They concluded that the coadsorption of carbon monoxide and OH group on the Ru atoms plays a crucial role in the methanol oxidation process. These results are consistent with the previously suggested bifunctional methanol oxidation mechanism with respect to the need for OH groups for the removal of carbon monoxide from Pt sites [85]. They also found the methanol adding effects that decreased the Ru-Ru and Ru-Pt bond lengths, increased the number of Ru-Pt near neighbors, and decreased the number of Ru-Ru near neighbors. Their results are summarized in Fig. 31.8.
Structural studies of the electrodeposited Cu layers on the iodine-treated carbonsupported Pt surface [86] and Pt nanoparticle surface [87] by in situ XAFS have also been reported. Thus, in situ XAFS has been utilized for various electrochemical systems for the structural determination from a fundamental point of view.

Electrocatalytic Reactions
Key processes in energy conversion devices, such as fuel cells, rechargeable batteries, and photocatalysts, are usually very complicated, involving multiple reactions of electrons, protons, and solution species, and then the reaction activity, selectivity, and durability are strongly affected by the geometric and electronic structures of the active materials on the electrodes. Since XAFS can analyze both the geometric and electronic structures, as already mentioned, in situ XAFS has been applied for clarifications of the mechanism of multi-electron and proton transfer reactions associated with the development of energy conversion devices.
PEMFCs have attracted much attention because of their high theoretical efficiency [87][88][89][90][91]. Currently, Pt-based materials are used as electrocatalysts for both the anode and cathode because of their very high catalytic activity for the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) [92,93] and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) [94]. However, the potential loss at the cathode caused by the slow kinetics of the ORR is a critical issue to improve the cell performances.
One of the effective approaches to improve the ORR activity and reduce the loading amount of Pt, which is a precious and high cost material, is utilization of co-catalysts in combination with Pt, and a variety of transition metals [95][96][97][98][99] and metal oxides [100][101][102][103][104][105] have been used as co-catalysts to enhance the electrocatalytic activity for the ORR. Our group investigated the role of CeO x in the enhancement of the ORR activity by in situ XAFS of the Pt-CeO x /C catalyst [39]. Upon the incorporation of CeO x into Pt, not only Ce 4þ corresponding to bulk CeO 2 but also Ce 3þ species were observed probably due to the formation of the Pt/CeO x interface. When the oxidation/reduction cycling was performed in a 0.5 M H 2 SO 4 solution, residual CeO 2 is preferentially eluted in the solution, so that the Ce 3þ species formed at the Pt surface is dominant. Thus, in contrast to the assumption that small Pt particles (a few nm) are attached to the relatively large CeO x particles (a few tens nm), Pt nanoparticles with a diameter of 3À5 nm are coated with a few CeO x layers in this Pt-CeO x /C catalyst.
Figure 31.9 shows the XANES spectra at the Pt L III -edge of the conventional Pt/C catalyst and at the Pt L III -and Ce L III -edges of the Pt-CeO x /C catalyst. At the Pt L III -edge, the white line intensity of the Pt/C catalyst increases as the potential becomes more positive than 1.0 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), showing the formation of Pt oxide because the white line intensity reflects the d-band vacancies. It is clear that the Pt surface of the Pt/C catalyst is partly covered with Pt oxide at the potentials where the ORR takes place. In contrast, only a slight change was observed in the white line intensity of the Pt-CeO x /C catalyst, showing the suppression of the Pt oxide formation. In fact, it is known that the ORR activity at the bare Pt surface is higher than that at the Pt oxide surface. Thus, the Pt-CeO x /C catalyst shows a higher electrocatalytic activity for the ORR because the intrinsic catalytic activity of the  [39] bare Pt surface is maintained by the suppression of the Pt oxide formation by CeO x . At the Ce L III -edge of the Pt-CeO x /C catalyst, a singlet peak assignable to the Ce 3þ species at the Pt/CeO x interface turned into a doublet peak characteristic of the CeO 2 in the potential region more negative than 1.1 V. This interconversion is considered to be the origin of suppression of the Pt oxide formation.
The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) has attracted much attention regarding the relation with artificial photosynthesis. Recently, we constructed organic molecular layers, which consist of viologen moieties as an electron transfer mediator and Pt complexes as a multi-electron transfer catalyst, on the hydrogen-terminated Si (111) surface, denoted as the Pt-V 2þ -Si (111) surface and demonstrated high photoelectrochemical HER activity [106,107]. Since the HER takes place at a potential much more negative than the redox potential of the Pt complexes, e.g., þ0.51 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) for PtCl 4
2À ions, we originally considered that the Pt complexes incorporated within the molecular layer were reduced to Pt metal nanoparticles and the actual catalyst for HER was the Pt metal nanoparticle. However, the formation of such nanoparticles was not observed by SEM, and the peak positions of the Pt 4f peaks in the XP spectrum of the Pt-V 2þ -Si(111) surface after the HER was at a binding energy slightly higher than that of Pt in the metallic state. Thus, an in situ polarization-dependent total-reflection fluorescence (PTRF)-XAFS analysis of the Pt-V 2þ -Si (111) surface was performed to identify the actual catalytic species. Figure 31.10 shows the XANES and EXAFS oscillations of the Pt-V 2þ -Si (111) surface measured in air and in a 0.1 M Na 2 SO 4 solution at various potentials, together with those for K 2 PtCl 4 and Pt foil as references [38].  (111) surface measured in air and in 0.1 M Na 2 SO 4 solution at various potentials. Those for K 2 PtCl 4 and Pt foil were also measured in air as references [38] At the Pt-V 2þ -Si (111) surface measured in air, the insertion of the PtCl 4 2À was confirmed by the observation of a small shoulder characteristic of the Pt-Cl bond just above the white line peak in the XANES spectra and the shape of the EXAFS oscillations was in good agreement with that of K 2 PtCl 4 , indicating that Pt exists as PtCl 4
2À in the molecular layer in air. As the potential was made more negative, the shoulder gradually decreased and finally disappeared at À0.6 V. The EXAFS oscillation in the region of k between 8 and 12 was significantly changed due to the replacement of Cl À with oxygenated species such as water or hydroxyl groups, which was supported by a FEFF simulation. Thus, Pt complexes act as molecular catalysts confined within the organic molecular layers without being converted into metal nanoparticles. Since noble metals are generally very extensive and limited resources, the atom efficiency needs to be a maximum as long as their practical uses are concerned. Such single atomic and molecular catalysts which enable a 100 % atom efficiency are a promising concept.

Chapter 32
Three-Dimensional Structures on Oxide Single-Crystal Surfaces Kiyotaka Asakura

Introduction
The surface structure of supported metal clusters can be finely controlled by using a well-defined metal complex and surface modifications, as described in the other chapter. The surface structures are stabilized by the interaction between the metal and support oxide. Investigation of a metal species on a single-crystal oxide surface will provide further knowledge regarding the structure of the metal species on oxide surfaces and the metal-oxide interaction. However, the investigation of a metal species on a single-crystal oxide surface is not easy because of the small amount of metal species and high penetration ability of the X-ray. As described in the other chapter, polarization-dependent total reflection fluorescence XAFS (PTRF-XAFS) will provide three-dimensional structural information of a metal species highly dispersed on flat surfaces. In this chapter, we discuss how to obtain an atomically dispersed metal species by controlling the oxide surface property and structure (mainly a TiO 2 (110) surface) and how to determine the three-dimensional structure on an atomic level using PTRF-XAFS. The structure mainly depends on the strengths of the metal-metal and metal-oxide interactions. What is the metaloxide interaction? Komiyama et al. reported that the metal-support interaction can be classified by the metal-oxide formation energies [1]. Larger metal-oxide formation energies, found from the early transition metals, give a smaller two-dimensional metal cluster or no aggregation, while the metals with smaller metal-oxide formation energies result in aggregated clusters. Komiyama et al. divided the transition metals into three domains [1]. In Domain I, the formation energy of metal-metal is larger than that of metal-oxygen, so three-dimensional growth is preferred. In Domain III, which is composed of many of the early transition metals, the metal-oxygen interaction is larger than that of the metal-metal interaction; two-dimensional growth is often observed. Domain II is the intermediate domain where both growth modes are observed.

Metals in Domain III
Molybdenum is located in Domain III as it has a strong interaction with the oxide surface. Actually, Mo is often observed not in the metallic state but in the hexavalent state (Mo 6þ ), when PTRF-XAFS is applied to the Mo system on the TiO 2 (110) surface. Figure 32.1 shows the ball model for the TiO 2 (110) surface. TiO 2 (110) is the most well-studied oxide surface. There are three types of surface atoms. One is the exposed Ti atom (denoted as fivefold Ti), another is the topmost oxygen (termed as bridging oxygen), and the last is the oxygen atoms in the same plane of the fivefold Ti (termed as in-plane oxygen) [2,3].
There are two types of Ti. One is exposed Ti, known as fivefold Ti, while the other Ti is covered with bridging oxygen atoms, known as sixfold Ti [2,3]   (110) surface. Large and small balls are oxygen and Ti atoms, respectively amount of alkaline species. It was reported that the Mo species deposited on SiO 2 using ultrapure water was MoO 3 and that more than 100 ppm Na converted the MoO 3 to Mo monomer or dimer [4][5][6]. Na þ enhanced the basicity of the oxide surface and stabilized the negative charge of the surface oxygen. On a MgO (0001) surface, which had a larger basicity than TiO 2 (110), the MoO 4 2À monomer species was found even if it was prepared using (NH 4 ) 6 Mo 7 O 24 dissolved in ultrapure water [7]. Therefore, the metals in Domain III have a high valence state and their structures are affected by the surface acidity or basicity.

Metals in Domain II
Ni is located on the border of Domains I and II. Therefore, the Ni structures vary depending on the preparation conditions. A two-dimensional dispersion has been observed when the Ni was deposited on the TiO 2 (110) surface with a deposition amount of less than 2 Â 10 14 cm À2 [8]. At higher deposition amounts, the Ni grows three-dimensionally. When the Ni loading was decreased, atomically dispersed Ni was observed. The Ni was atomically dispersed at a density of 1 Â 10 13 cm À2 of Ni on TiO 2 (110)  [9,10]. Ni was bound to the surface by oxygen atoms with no Ni-Ti bonds observed. There were several threefold sites on the TiO 2 (110) surface [9]. The Ni structure on any sites of the terrace could not reproduce the Ni K-edge PTRF-XAFS oscillations in any direction because of the underlying Ti effects. The EXAFS oscillations could only be reproduced when the Ni was located at the step-kink site, as shown in Fig. 32.3. This site was the virtual Ti site where Ti should be located in the bulk crystal and oxygen dangling bonds directed in the Ni direction. The Ni was trapped by the oxygen dangling bonds [10].
It is often assumed that the Ni-Ti interaction on the TiO 2 (110) is important for stabilizing the metal species on the surface. We could not observe the Ni-Ti interaction on the clean TiO 2 (110) surface [8][9][10]12]. To increase the possibility for Ni-Ti formation, we removed the surface oxygen atoms by gentle sputtering to create the oxygen defects [13]. We applied the PTRF-XAFS analyses on the gently In the [ 110 ] direction, we found only the Ni-O interaction. After sputtering, oxygen defects and step sites were both created. The Ni defect interaction was not as strong as the step site where the Ni linear trimer structure was stabilized [13]. We concluded again that the metals are stabilized by the surface anions (oxygen atoms) rather than by a Ni-cation interaction [12]. Similar interactions were observed on an Al 2 O 3 (0001) surface. Ijima et al. studied Ni deposited on Al 2 O 3 [10,14]. They found three-dimensional growth of Ni clusters for a loading of 2 Â 10 14 cm À2 with Ni-Ni distance on the Al 2 O 3 (001) surface. When the Ni loading was 3 Â 10 13 cm À2 , atomically dispersed Ni was observed. PTRF-XAFS analysis indicated that the Ni was fixed to the threefold oxygen atoms. There were three types of oxygen threefold sites at the Al 2 O 3 (0001) surface, as shown in Fig. 32.5. The differences of these three sites were the positions of the underlying Al. Site 1 contained surface Al atoms which could be replaced with Ni atoms. Consequently, no underlying Al atoms were present. Sites 2 and 3 had the Al at 2.42 Å and 2.79 Å below the surface oxygen layer, respectively. The p-polarization XAFS indicated the presence of Ni-Al at 2.79 Å, indicating that the Ni was located at Site 3. Site 3 was the virtual Al site, that is, Al was removed by the formation of the surface. Thus, the oxygen dangling bonds were directed to this site. Ni was considered to be trapped at this position by making the Ni and oxygen through these oxygen dangling bonds similar to the Ni trapped in the step-kink on the TiO 2 (110) surface [10]. Both examples show that the anion is the interaction site with Ni and the dangling bond of the anion plays an important role in forming a bond with the metal atoms [9]. The Ni-cation interaction was not strong enough to stabilize the atomically dispersed Ni metal.

Precious Metals in Domain I and Their Atomic Distributions
Additional precious metals in Domain I, such as Au and Cu, which have more metalmetal interactions than metal-oxygen interactions, are easily aggregated on the oxide surface. Figure 32.6 shows Au on the TiO 2 (110) surface with a coverage of 1 Â 10 13 cm À2 with various polarization directions [16,17]. The Au-Au bonds were found in all directions. The coordination number was smaller than that observed for Au foil indicating the formation of a three-dimensional nanocluster with a size of 1-2 nm. Cu similarly coalesced to create the Cu three-dimensional nanoparticle [18]. Easy aggregation of Cu and Au arises from the weak interaction with oxygen atoms on the surface of oxides, as discussed by Komiyama [1]. There are several ways to prevent the coalescence. One method is to stabilize the atomic metal species or small metal clusters using protecting ligands or polymers. The Au nanoclusters were stabilized as in the state of the protective colloid. The thiol ligand can stabilize the Au nanoclusters, and the Au nanocluster size can be controlled by adjusting the number of atoms [19]. Especially, thiolate-or triphenylphosphine-protected Au nanoclusters with the magic number were highly stabilized by their superatomic effect [20]. Peptide-stabilized Au nanoclusters were deposited on TiO 2 and studied by glancing angle XAFS [21]. Judging from the incident angle, the total reflection conditions might not be satisfied. The ratio of Au to peptide controlled the Au size, with the Au size becoming smaller as the ratio of Au to peptide decreased. Two peptides, N-(2-mercapto-propionyl) glycine (MPG) and glutathione (GSH), were investigated. GSH provided a smaller-sized Au than MPG  (110) surface with various polarization directions. The orientations are indicated on the right of the figure with the X-ray coming from the front to the back [16,17] when the same molar ratio was used. Both GSH and MPG could disperse Au species atomically when the Au to peptide ratio was 2.
An organometallic compound was used as a highly dispersed metal species on an oxide surface. When Cu(DPM) 2 (DPM ¼ dipivaloylmethanate, 2,2,6,6,-tetramethyl-3,5-heptadione) was reacted with the TiO 2 (110) surface, atomically dispersed Cu species on the TiO 2 (110) were obtained [7,22,23]. One of the DPM ligands remained on the Cu species, and Cu complex was attached to the bridging oxygen row with a tetrahedral structure and a Cu-O bond distance of 1.94 Å [23]. The Cu species attached to the TiO 2 (110) surface could be transformed to Cu 3 (Cu trimer) or Cu 6 (Cu hexamer) by following a mild reduction treatment [7,22,23].
The other method to disperse the metal species is an anchoring method using a compound that has two binding sites: the metal binding site and oxide surface binding site. The TiO 2 (110) surface strongly adsorbs the organic carboxylic acid [11]. Acetic acid and formic acid formed an ordered surface structure on the TiO 2 (110) surface, such as (2 Â 1), where the COO À moiety was adsorbed on the exposed Ti 4þ in a bidentate form, as shown in Fig. 32.7. The SH ligand can make a strong bond with Au. The mercaptobenzoic acid has two moieties that could be used to anchor the Au onto the TiO 2 (110) surface.
Figure 32.8 shows the XAFS oscillations of the Au on TiO 2 covered with o-mercaptobenzoic acid (o-MBA). Au was deposited on the TiO 2 (110) surface by vacuum evaporation by heating a Au wire under ultrahigh vacuum conditions. When Au was deposited on the bare TiO 2 (110) surface, Au nanoparticles were found, as shown in Fig. 32.6. However, when Au was deposited on the MBA-premodified surface, the oscillations were not observed up to the high k region, as shown in Fig. 32.8a, indicating no Au-Au interaction and Au was atomically dispersed. Further analysis showed that the Au species was sandwiched by the S of o-MBA and the bridging O of the surface [24]. The bond angle between S-Au-O was nearly 180 with a direction of 50 against the surface normal of TiO 2 (110). The bond lengths of Au-S and Au-O were 2.32 Å and 2.11 Å, respectively. This sandwiched structure stabilized the Au atomically dispersed structure. The Au-S  (110). Small black circles represent Ti and yellow larger circles represent oxygen atoms. Purple circles indicate the acetate (CH 3 COO À ) group. The acetates formed an ordered structure termed as (2 Â 1). Green circles represent the proton dissociated from CH 3 COOH bond was strong enough to modify the surface structure of mercaptobenzoate. In the m-mercaptobenzoic acid and p-mercaptobenzoate, S-Au-O structures were found where one Ti-O bond in the carboxylic moiety was cleaved and mercaptobenzoic acid was fixed to the surface with the other Ti-O bond, as shown in Fig. 32.9 [24].
Cu could be dispersed on the MBA-modified TiO 2 (110) surface in a similar way. Takakusagi et al. investigated the Cu structure on the three MBA isomers (o-, m-, and p-MBA). The atomically dispersed Cu species was stabilized on the o-MBA-pre-covered surface by bond formation with sulfur atoms of the MBA molecules and the bridging oxygen atoms on the TiO 2 (110) substrate surface. The Cu-S bond length was found to be 2.19 Å, while the distance Ref. [24] with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) Fig. 32.9 Ball-and-stick model for Au on the m-MBA modified TiO 2 (110) surface. The m-MBA was fixed to the surface by one O-Ti bond owing to the strong S-Au bond [24] associated with the Cu-O interaction was 1.85 Å. The Cu-S and Cu-O bond angles to the surface normal were 45 and 43 , respectively. The S-Cu-O was nearly 180 . When the TiO 2 (110) surface was pre-covered with m-MBA and p-MBA (regioisomers of o-MBA), a similar S-Cu-O structure was observed. The Cu-S and Cu-O bond distances were 2.19 Å and 1.85 Å, respectively, on the m-MBA pre-covered surface. The S-Cu-O had a collinear structure with a 44 tilt against the surface normal. However, the S-Cu-O on the p-MBA was found to have a different structure. The Cu-S and Cu-O distances were 2.23 Å and 1.90 Å, respectively, which were longer than those in the S-Cu-O complexes on the o-MBA and m-MBA pre-covered surfaces. Another difference observed in the S-Cu-O complexes was the tilt angle against the surface normal. The tilt angle between the surface normal and S-Cu-O complex on the p-MBA pre-covered surface was approximately 60 . The S-Cu-O was more parallel to the surface in p-MBA than m-and o-MBA. The regio-isomers of MBA could tune the surface structure.
In the case of Cu, thiophene carboxylic acid (TCA) also dispersed Cu atomically, making a sandwich structure between the S of TCA and surface oxygen atoms with bond distances of 2.19 Å and 1.89 Å, respectively [18,25,26]. However, TCA could not disperse Au atomically, owing to the different bond strengths of thiophene's S-Au and thiolate's S-Au bonds [24]. The former was a weak bond. Actually, as far as the author knows, no compounds have been found with the thiophene's S-Au bond though there are many examples of compounds binding with mercapto's S-Au bond [24].
When the TiO 2 (110) surface was modified with benzoic acid and acetic acid, the atomically dispersed Cu species on the surface was not obtained because of the weak interactions between Cu and the benzoic ring or methyl species. Interestingly, Cu was atomically dispersed when the surface was covered with acetic anhydride (CH 3 CO) 2 O [27]. Cu has a sandwich structure composed of the O from the acetate and the bridging O. The two Cu-O distances were 1.96 Å and the O-Cu-O angle was 166 . The O-Cu-O linear structure was tilted by 47 from the surface normal. The structure was quite similar to those found in the thiophene and MBA molecules' pre-covered surfaces. The (CH 3 CO) 2 O was adsorbed on the TiO 2 (110) surface dissociatively. Ashima et al. investigated the surface using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), low-energy electron diffraction (LEED), and highresolution electron energy loss (HREELS) [28]. They found that the typical acetic acid adsorption LEED pattern was the p(2 Â 1) structure. The adsorption amount was 0.55 ML larger than the saturation coverage (0.5 ML) in XPS. Considering the (CH 3 CO 2 ) 2 O composition, the dissociation reaction provided two types of acetate, as shown in Fig. 32.10.
One acetate (A) adsorbed on the TiO 2 surface in a bidentate structure and the other acetate (B) was bound to the bridging oxygen of TiO 2 (110) with its molecular plane perpendicular to the surface [28]. If these two structures fully covered the surface, a maximum of 0.75 ML coverage was achievable. The observed coverage was 0.55 ML. Because a p(2 Â 1) structure was observed where only acetate A was present, some acetate B was converted to acetate A with the creation of oxygen defects, as shown in Fig. 32.10b. Kinoshita et al. demonstrated two types of acetate structures in their STM [29]. The Cu was assumed to diffuse along the channel on the bridging oxygen atoms. Acetate B or the oxygen defect blocked the Cu diffusion and consequently the Cu diffusion was hindered. The Cu species reacted with the acetate species to form the O-Cu-O sandwich structure [27]. The atomically dispersed Cu requires two ligands for stabilization and formation of the sandwich structure.

Summary
Total reflection fluorescence XAFS is a unique method that reveals atomically dispersed metal on a single crystal or flat surface. Basically, dispersion of the metal is determined by the strength of the metal-anion interaction. Control of the metal-anion interaction enables us to control the fine structure of the metal species on the surface.

Index
