Introduction to X-ray absorption spectroscopy for local structural studies:
In this section an introduction to X-ray absorption fine structure is reported. After a review of some basic phenomenology, the origin of the fine structure in X-ray absorption spectra is described. An outline of multiple scattering (MS) theory is presented and, in this framework, the extended and near-edge regions of the X-ray absorption spectrum are discussed.1.1. Outline and origin of the fine structure in X-ray absorption spectraIn the X-ray and vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) spectral regions, photoelectric absorption is the dominant interaction mechanism between electromagnetic radiation and matter. An X-ray absorption spectrum is a measurement of the absorption coefficient of a sample, (" h!), or of a quantity to which it is directly proportional, as a function of the energy of the impinging photons " h!. One can determine (conceptually and experimentally) the absorption coefficient by measuring the flux of monochromatic photons incident on and transmitted by a sample of thickness x, I 0 , and I T , respectively; these quantities are related byThe product (" h!)x (a quantity proportional to the absorbance commonly used in VUV and visible spectroscopy) can be obtained by inverting Eq. (X-ray absorption spectra exhibit sharp absorption edges which occur at the energies at which excitation of particular core levels becomes energetically allowed. The energies of absorption edges are characteristic of each element; for example, excitation of electrons from 1s, 2s, 2p 1/ continuum and unbound final state. The final energy of the photoelectron is dictated by energy conservation,In the dipole approximation, the atomic absorption cross section ( just as for electronic transitions in the optical and UV region) is proportional to the square modulus of the matrix element of the position operator between the initial and final states:where " is the unit vector defining the direction of the electric field of the exciting X-ray beam andr is the position operator. Let us consider only continuum final states. If the atom were not embedded in a matrix (e.g., a monoatomic gas) the final state wave function would be, at sufficiently high energies, that of an outgoing spherical wave and no fine structure would result. The relation between wave number (k = 2 / l, with l the wavelength) and kinetic energy for such a free electron iswhere the second equality uses Eq.photoelectron wave number and on the relative atomic arrangement, the scattering process may lead to an enhancement or a decrease of the amplitude of the final state wave function close to the core level orbital and thus to an increase or decrease of the cross section described by Eq. (where 0 (k) is the absorption coefficient in the absence of neighboring atoms. The EXAFS spectrum for GaAs at the Ga-edge is shown in the top inset of Fig.As the photoelectron energy decreases, closer to the absorption edge, photoelectron scattering by the neighboring atoms' potential will become increasingly important and MS processes will give a greater contribution to the fine structure. This spectral region, which extends from the edge to roughly 50 eV above it, is commonly referred to as X-ray absorption 5 10 15 20 k (Å -1 ) χ (k) 10,360 10,400 Fig. 2. Ga K-edge X-ray absorption spectrum of GaAs. The top inset reports the EXAFS function, (k), while the bottom inset highlights the XANES spectral region.near-edge structure (XANES) or near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS). It must be stressed that the distinction between the two regions is largely arbitrary and that there is no difference in the basic physical mechanism which gives rise to the fine structure; however, the analysis methods for EXAFS and XANES are different and thus it is reasonable to maintain the nomenclature. In the next section the separation between the two spectral regions will be discussed in more quantitative terms in the framework of MS theory.In the past 30 years, XAFS has evolved into a reliable tool which is able to provide a quantitative measurement of the local structure in condensed matter and has been applied to fields ranging from solid-state physics to cultural heritage materials. A number of review papersThe purpose of this chapter is to report on the application of XAFS to the subject matter of the present book, semiconductor heterostructures and nanostructures. After description of theoretical and experimental aspects of XAFS, a review of applications and results is reported. The use of synchrotron radiation techniques for the characterization of semiconductor heterostructures has been recently reviewed by Lamberti

Multiple scattering theory framework and key approximations:
In this section the basis of XAFS in the framework of MS theoryPhotoelectric absorption is treatedwhere the index j covers all the electrons in the system and the label f identifies all final states compatible with the energy conservation dictated by the Dirac delta function. This intractable problem is greatly simplified in the one-electron approximation, in which it is assumed that only one electron is involved in the process, the others being unaffected; many-body corrections are added a posteriori (see below). In this approximation, it is assumed that one electron makes a transition between a localized core atomic orbital (e.g., the 1s orbital), described by a wave function c c , and a final state described by a wave function c f ; in ab initio calculations, the presence of the core hole can be taken into account in calculation of c f . A further common simplification is the dipole approximation, which neglects the spatial variation of the vector potential across the extent of the core level orbital. The photoelectric absorption cross section for transitions to continuum final states can be writtenwhere (E f ) is the density of the final states, the energy of which is given by energy conservation as E f = E c þ " h!, and (in SI units) ¼ e 2 4p" 0 " hc ffi 1=137 is the fine structure constant, which is thus seen to determine the order of magnitude of the cross section. Important consequences of the dipole approximation are the selection rules which determine, on the basis of symmetry, which final states are allowed for a given initial state; for a free atom they arewhere ' is the orbital angular momentum quantum number and m ' determines its projection on the quantization axis. Thus, for a K absorption edge, the transition will be to p states.One must now treat the modification of the final state due to the presence of neighboring atoms, that is, to the scattering of the photoelectron by their potential. Because the principal interaction of the photoelectron is with the core level electrons of surrounding atoms, the muffin tin approximation for the scattering potential is commonly adopted. This consists in spherically averaging the potential around each atom and adopting a constant interstitial potential in between. In this approximation, the calculation of the absorption cross section is simplified into an MS problem of the final state wave function by a collection of spherically symmetric scattering centers.Under the previously stated assumptions, it has been demonstratedwhere 0 " h! ð Þ is the atomic cross section. Each element of the matrices which appear in Eq. (At sufficiently high energies above the edge (say 50 eV) the formal matrix expansionin Eq. (where 0 identifies the central atom, the subscripts indicate the number of scattering "legs" and the superscripts indicate the scattering path, starting and ending on the central atom via atoms i and j. Scattering paths with two and three legs are pictorially represented in Fig.The matrix expansion Eq. (

EXAFS or extended X-ray absorption fine structure:
Sufficiently far from the edge, in the EXAFS region, the MS series is convergent and this leads to a compact expression for the EXAFS function (Eq. (where Á Á Á h i denotes a configurational average, r0i is the unit vector joining atoms 0 and i, and ũi is the instantaneous deviation of the position of atom i from its average position. An important point is that the XAFS DW factor depends on the degree of correlation of the vibration of the two atoms, while the DW factor which affects the intensity of XRD peaks depends only on the mean square deviation of each atom's position with respect to its equilibrium value, projected in the direction of the wave vector difference. The effect of moderate static structural disorder can also be taken into account by a supplementary DW factor.With these approximations, the SS contribution the EXAFS function can be written in a compact form. With the central atom taken as reference, the neighboring atoms are grouped into coordination shells labeled by the index j and consisting of N j identical atoms at the interatomic distance r j ; in the harmonic approximation for thermal motion and for a randomly oriented crystalline powder sample we havewhere f j (r j k) and ' j are the modulus and argument of the effective scattering amplitude of atoms in shell j and is the phase shift due to the central atom. The scattering amplitude depends also on the interatomic distance r j , as the curved wave nature of the photoelectron wave function is taken into account; in the plane-wave approximation, adopted in more elementary treatments, this dependence no longer exists. If the sample is an oriented single crystal and if, as usual, a linearly polarized photon beam is used, each atomic correlation will contribute to (k) with a weight w 0i which depends on the relative orientation of r0i , the unit vector joining atoms 0 and i, and the direction of polarization "; a simple expression for this weight can be obtained in the small atom approximation in which the spatial extension of scattering region associated to each neighboring atom is neglected with respect to photoelectron wavelength:Despite the apparently crude approximation, this weighting factor is very useful to estimate linear dichroism effects. Contributions to (k) due to MS paths have a form similar to Eq.The total EXAFS function will be the sum of all the SS and MS paths, as indicated by Eq. (Because the EXAFS function is the sum of sine functions, the argument of which is kr G , a Fourier transform (FT) of (k) will exhibit peaks in correspondence to the path length; the FT is usually plotted as a function of the half path length which, for SS paths, is equal to the interatomic distance. In Fig.EXAFS analysis requires an adequate starting structural model, which can be obtained from prior knowledge of the sample. An up-to-date analysis usually is based upon a simulation of the EXAFS signal and a subsequent refinement of the local structural parameters via a least squares routine. A description of data analysis methods is beyond the scope of this paper; the interested reader is referred to existing literature and manuals. (Useful lists of XAFS software can be found in the web pages xafs.org,

XANES or near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure:
In the near-edge spectral region, the MS series (Eq. (An interpretation of XANES spectra in term of electronic structure is also possible. In fact, referring to Eq. (XANES finds widespread application in many different fields, in which it is often used with a "finger-printing" approach whereby the spectrum of a sample is compared to those of a number of reference compounds of known structure; for example, the XANES spectra of transition metal compounds exhibit clear and significant differences with oxidation state and coordination, the most extensive compilation of which has probably been performed in the field of mineralogy (for a specific example, see Ref.Because XANES is sensitive to the three-dimensional atomic geometry (while the dominant contributions to EXAFS are of a one-dimensional character) and because XANES spectra are more easily recorded than EXAFS ones, especially for dilute elements, a quantitative interpretation of XANES would be of great interest. In the field of semiconductors, we quote the recent paper by Ciatto et al.Let us conclude mentioning that in the important case of the L-edges of transition metals, in which a p electron makes a transition to a narrow d band, because of the strong electron correlation effects multiplet theory is used to interpret the spectra. A useful review paper on these aspects has been written by de Groot

Detection schemes and experimental setups relevant for semiconductor research:
In this section, the main experimental setups that are relevant for semiconductor research are described. Of course, an essential requirement to perform an XAFS experiment is that of a brilliant synchrotron radiation source and appropriate optics, the role of which is to provide a focal spot on the sample of the required characteristics in terms of photon flux, bandpass, stability, divergence, and spot size. There has been great progress in this field in the past years and a great number of papers and books have been published, some of which are reported in RefsHere, we focus our attention on the experimental chamber itself and the appropriate detection schemes. The objective of any XAFS measurement is to record, as a function of photon energy, a quantity which is directly proportional to the cross section of the atom of interest in the particular environment or phase which is relevant for the experiment. A number of methods have been devised and will be described here. As for diffraction anomalous fine structure (DAFS) we refer to Chapter 11 by Proietti et al.

Transmission geometry:
A transmission measurement of XAFS is the most commonly used in general. It relies on the measurement of the flux of monochromatic photons incident (I 0 ) and transmitted (I T ) by a sample of thickness x. Inversion of Eq.where (" h!) is the absorption coefficient. The main requirement for this kind of measurement is that the discontinuity in x be in the rangeIn the field of semiconductor heterostructures and nanostructures one is mostly interested in studying the local structure of ultrathin films, nanolayers, or low-dimensional structures on, or near, the surface. Pristine samples are thus not usually appropriate for measurements in the transmission mode, as the background due to the substrate or matrix would be too high. In a notable exception, Ridgway's group

Decay channels: fluorescence and electron yield:
Reduction of the background absorption signal originating from the matrix can be obtained by selectively recording the intensity of an atom-specific signal. For example, one can exploit the decay of photoexcited atom, which occurs with the emission of either a fluorescence photon (this is the so-called characteristic radiation) or of an Auger electron, both of which have energies that depend on the atomic number of the photoexcited atom.

Fluorescence yield detection:
In the fluorescence yield (FY) detection modewhere " f is the FY, is the solid angle subtended by the detector, " h! f is the energy of the fluorescence photons, is the angle between the impinging beam, and the sample surface and the total absorption coefficient (see Eq. (Because both the probe and the detected signals are penetrating X-rays, FY is the best choice to study dilute elements in the bulk of materials. This has led to a wide application of XAFS to the study of dopants in semiconductors. The lowest concentration which can be measured in a FY-XAFS experiment ultimately depends on the magnitude of the inelastic scattering background in the specific experimental geometry. Takeda et al.

Electron yield detection:
The decay of the core hole can occur also with the emission of an Auger electron. This Auger electron creates a cascade of lower energy ("secondary") electrons due to multiple ionization and inelastic scattering processes. Various electron yield detection methods exist, depending on which electrons are detected and the detection method. The experimentally simplest method, often used in the soft X-ray region, consists of measuring the drain current using an electrometer which connects the sample to ground; this method, termed total electron yield (TEY), can be traced back to the pioneering investigation by Gudat and KunzThe main peculiarity of all electron detection modes is the surface sensitivity, which is guaranteed by the limited electron mean free path. Hence, these modes are particularly useful for the investigation of the near-surface region or of interfaces. Erbil et al.Spectra recorded using electron detection methods may suffer from "self-absorption effects," the origin of which is identical to that previously illustrated for FY; usually, the effect is less severe than in FY as the electron absorption coefficient is much higher than the photon absorption coefficient and thus it dominates the denominator in Eq. (

Alternative detection methods:
A number of "nonconventional" methods to detect XAFS have been proposed, each with its own advantages, limitations, and pitfalls. We briefly review the ones which have relevance to the investigation of semiconductors, leaving a discussion of results on specific systems to Section 3.

Optical detection:
When excited by an X-ray beam, many samples emit visible or near-visible radiation. The use of this X-ray excited optical luminescence (XEOL) and the measurement of the XAFS spectrum via the resulting photoluminescence yield (PLY) have attracted considerable attention, in view of the possibility of determining the local structure of only the atoms involved in the luminescence emission, thus adding site selectivity to XAFS. XEOL was first observed by Bianconi et al.A fundamental issue is the effective site selectivity of PLY-XAFS: it should be verified that the change of the PLY at the absorption edge of a particular atom is only due to absorbers in the optically active centers. In many cases, particularly in scintillators or ionic crystals, the optically active center may be different or distant from the selected absorbing atoms. In the case of a sample consisting of a mixture of ZnS-ZnSe powders, in which the two components emit at different wavelengths, site selectivity was clearly demonstrated by Pettifer and BourdillonPLY-XAFS has found an important application in the study of porous Si, which emits in the visible range, and specific results will be illustrated in Section 3. Recently, PLY-XAFS has been applied in the study of ZnO nanostructured materials both at the high-energy K-edge

Electrical detection:
The electrical detection of XAFS has been investigated by some groups with the objective of determining whether the local structure of only those atoms contributing to the electrical signal due to defects could be determined, leading to another attractive site-selective version of XAFS.Photocurrent-detected XAFS spectrum has been reported by Boehme et al.Ishii et al.The site selectivity of capacitance-detected XAFS has been challenged in detail by Bollmann et al.

Beta environmental fine structure:
We mention briefly a method which is potentially of great interest for the study of defects and dopants in semiconductors. In the context of precise measurements of the neutrino mass, it has been suggestedBEFS was detected

Grazing incidence:
The interaction between an electromagnetic wave and a sample can be described, in a macroscopic picture, by the index of refraction. The propagation of a wave traveling in the direction x is determined by the phase factorwhere ! is the angular frequency and k is the wave vector, with the wave number being j kj ¼ k ¼ 2=l (l is the wavelength), the velocity of propagation is v = !/k. In the X-ray range the index of refraction can be written aswhere both and are positive and <<1; and describe dispersion and absorption processes, respectively, and, like the real and imaginary part of the permittivity, are related by the Kramers-Kro ¨nig relations. For Si at l $ 1.2 A ˚(" h! = 10 keV), ffi 9.8 Â 10 À6 and ffi 1.5 Â 10 À7 . As a consequence, an X-ray beam impinging on the flat surface of a sample may undergo total external reflection if the angle of incidence (, taken to be the angle between the beam's direction and the surface) is smaller than the critical angleFor Si at l $ 1.2 A ˚, c ffi 4.5 mrad. For < c , the reflectivity approaches 1 and inside the sample the beam is confined to the near-surface region; compact expressions for the penetration depth Ã in the direction normal to the surface can be derivedThe last expression in Eq. (The possibility of using grazing incidence to probe the surface region of materials was illustrated by ParrattA number of methods have been proposed to extract an XAFS spectrum from the reflectivity, each with its advantages and limitations

Surface X-ray absorption fine structure:
The potential of XAFS to determine the local structure of interfaces deposited in situ in an ultrahigh-vacuum environment was realized early onSurface XAFS relies on detection schemes which are able to distinguish the signal originating in the interface from that originating from the bulk: TEY, PEY, or FY, often combined with grazing incidence, all of which have been described previously. Of course, the further requirement is of an ultrahigh-vacuum chamber connected to the beamline and equipped with all the instrumentation required to prepare an atomically clean and ordered surface and to deposit and characterize ultrathin epilayers. A particularly detailed description of a well-equipped surface XAFS apparatus has been reported by Oyanagi et al.

Micro-XAFS:
As brighter synchrotron sources have become available it has become possible to obtain smaller focal spot sizes and to design instruments capable of increasingly higher spatial resolution. In fact, the field of X-ray microscopy has progressed very rapidly in recent years; lateral resolutions of the order of 10 nm have been obtained with photoelectron imaging techniques, e.g., the photo emission electron microscope or PEEM (see Locatelli et al.There is a great interest in performing XAFS with high lateral resolution (micro-XAFS) as it allows a new level of description of heterogeneous samples, combining microscopy with the atomic-scale structural information obtainable from XAFS; with sufficiently small focal spots the local atomic environment of single nanostructures might be determined. The challenge is to record XAFS spectra free of systematic errors and with sufficiently good signal-to-noise ratio. At present, XAFS spectra can be recorded with spot sizes of the order of a few square micrometers, for example, on the ID22 beamline

A review of the use of XAFS in the field of semiconductor heterostructures and nanostructures:
In the field of materials science, new growth and deposition schemes are continuously devised, with the objective of obtaining samples and devices with novel physical properties. The role of highly sensitive and sophisticated methods such as XAFS is to provide a description of the local atomic environment which can form the structural basis for an understanding of the physical properties. In the past 20 years, XAFS has developed from an intriguing physical phenomenon to a tool that is used in many branches of science. In this section, an attempt is made to review the use of XAFS in the study of the local atomic environment of semiconductor heterostructures and nanostructures. This is a rather wide field and the choice of examples is partially a personal one. Not all aspects of semiconductor science are covered, for example, the important application of XAFS to the study of dopants, implanted atoms, and defects is not included.

Bond lengths in strained III-V heterostructures:
The study of the effect of strain on the local atomic structure, especially on the bond lengths, is an area in which XAFS has provided key results, clarifying what initially seemed a rather confusing situation. The applicability of XAFS to study small bond length variations in (unstrained) semiconductor pseudobinary alloys was demonstrated in pioneering papers in the 1980swhere a AC and a BC are the well-known lattice parameters of the binary compounds. It is found experimentally that the bond lengths, R AC and R BC , exhibit a much weaker dependence on x. This can be qualitatively understood as due to the "rigidity" of semiconductor bonds and implies the existence of local distortions, i.e., variations of the bond angles. A comprehensive theory of bond length variation in semiconductor alloys, able to reproduce existing experimental results and with predictive ability, was proposed by Cai and Thorpex Te x from neutron diffraction data, where a f is the epilayer's free (unstrained) lattice parameter; for two-dimensional growth on a (001)-oriented substrate the strains are related bywhere C 12 and C 11 are the elastic constants. The open issue at the beginning of the 1990s was the effect of this long-range strain at the local scale, i.e., on the individual bond lengths. Is there such an effect (also in consideration of the known rigidity of bonds)? If so, in the case of an alloy, is it the same for different bonds and how does it combine with bond length variations induced by alloying itself? The problem is graphically depicted in Fig.Bond length strain has been studied both for SiGe alloys deposited on Si(001) and for heterostructures based on III-V semiconductors; the clearest results have been obtained in the latter case. The issue can be tackled in two ways. For a binary epilayer or for an alloy epilayer with fixed composition, the bond lengths can be measured as a function of thickness: the effect of strain should show up as strain relaxation will occur above the critical thickness. Alternatively, for an alloy epilayer below the critical thickness, the bond lengths can be measured as a function of the composition: the strain will change as the free lattice parameter varies according to Eq. (Initially, many authorsA couple of years later, experiments on strained alloy layers as a function of composition allowed to gain definitive insight on strain-induced bond length variations and to propose a simple model for the effect. Romanato et al.The effects of alloying and strain are summed linearly. As can be seen, the agreement with the data is excellent. A consequence of this model is that different bonds (e.g., In-As and Ga-As) actually respond to strain in the same way, despite the fact that bond stretching force constants are significantly different; this is not surprising as the alloying-induced variations7.3 Layer thickness (Å) InP 0.4 As 0.6 InAs 2.614 Å 2.623 Å In-As bond length (Å) × 10 19 /cm 3 2.595 2.600 2.605 2.610 2.615 2.620 2.625 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 Fig. 7. In-As bond length in InAs and InAs 0.6 P 0.4 layers on InP(001) (both of which are compressively strained) as a function of thickness (reprinted with permission from Ref. [114]. Copyright (1994) by the Institute of Pure and Applied Physics). 2.44 2.46 2.48 2.50 2.52 were reproduced with average values of the force constants

Atomic environment in nanostructures:
XAFS has been used to determine the atomic environment in many semiconductor nanostructures. The applicability of XAFS to study the changes of the local environment in nanostructures as a function of their dimensions was recognized early in the development of the technique, as shown by the studies on metallic clusters performed in the 1980s

Ge quantum dots and islands on Si surfaces and related systems:
The possibility of altering the physical properties of semiconductors by exploiting quantum size effects has lead to the recent big interest in nanostructures. In this field, XAFS has provided key results, especially regarding the intermixing in Ge quantum dots and islands on Si. XAFS has the advantage of providing a local view of the atomic environment of the excited atom, thus providing quantitative information on intermixing and bond length strain in a direct fashion. The chemical sensitivity necessary to obtain information on intermixing can be obtained by XRD techniques only by exploiting anomalous dispersion. In this context, anomalous XRD at high momentum transfer has been successfully applied to determine composition and strain profiles of Ge islands on SiThe advantages of XAFS to study the local Ge quantum dots on Si in comparison to Raman spectroscopy have been described by Kolobov et al.Atomic intermixing is not limited to the group IV dots and islands but was found also in those based on III-V compound semiconductors. Galluppi et al.0 2 4 6 Ge in Si Ge bulk Dots Interatomic distance (Å) Magnitude of the Fourier transform (Å -3 ) 1Fig.

Embedded semiconductor nanoparticles:
Semiconductor nanoparticles embedded in a dielectric medium can exhibit unique optical properties and have been actively studied recently, also in view of potential applications. Variations of the physical properties derive from quantum size effects and from the increased surface-to-volume ratio in smaller particles. Among the fabrication methods proposed, ion implantation followed by thermal annealing is a very flexible means to realize nanoparticles in the near-surface region of a dielectric. We will focus our attention on studies of Ge, GaN, and II-VI nanoparticles embedded in a variety of mostly amorphous media.The local structure of Ge nanocrystals in silica has been studied by Ridgway's group, who obtained two main results. Firstly, for mean nanocrystal sizes of 14 nm, these authors confirmed the tetrahedral coordination of Ge in the nanocrystals but showed that, compared to bulk crystalline Ge, an enhancement of both Gaussian and non-Gaussian disorder is presentAn original route for the fabrication of GaN quantum dots in crystalline (quartz and sapphire) or amorphous (silica) dielectrics by sequential ion implantation of Ga and N followed by annealing in NH 3 or NH 3 /H 2 has been reported by Borsella et al.Studies of CdS nanoparticles embedded in glass have been reported by Hayes's group. These nanoparticles are obtained by doping a borosilicate glass in the melt with 0.1% weight CdS and subsequent quenching and annealing (at 625-900°C); with increasing annealing temperature and time, CdS particles grow in size until they finally dissolve. These particles have typical diameters ranging from 2 to 6 nm and clearly exhibit a blue shift of the optical absorption edge due to quantum confinement. XAFS at the Cd-edge showed

Metallic nanostructures embedded in silica:
Metallic nanocrystals embedded in amorphous SiO 2 on Si(001) have been recently investigated in view of their nonlinear optical properties, with applications ranging from optical fibers, memories, and switching devices. XAFS has been employed by several groups to study the variations of the local structure as a function of particle size and processing, and its relation to the physical properties. Spiga et al.

Porous Si and related systems:
Obtaining visible light emission (luminescence) from Si and fabricating a Si-based optoelectronic device has been a very active area of research in recent years. Porous Si (p-Si), typically obtained by anodic etching of a Si wafer in an electrochemical cell containing HF acid and exhibiting such luminescence, has been the object of intense research. The origin of the luminescence has been often attributed to a quantum size effect but competing interpretations attribute the luminescence to oxide-related structures on the surface of the Si. XAFS measurements, especially conducted in the PLY (or XEOL) detection mode, have played an important role in correlating the atomic structure to the physical properties and in elucidating the origin of the luminescence.The first study by PLY-XAFS was reported by Sham's groupRather extensive investigations of p-Si using XAFS have been conducted by the Trento group. In their investigations, the samples are usually freshly prepared and soaked in HF to remove the oxide component just before the measurements. A first investigationA field related to that of porous semiconductors is that of free-standing wires (NWs). By a variety of methods, it is possible to fabricate filamentous structures with diameters ranging from a few to a few tens of nanometers and lengths up to a few hundred microns. The wires are generally covered by an oxide layer. XAFS has provided an atomistic description of the structure of these systems. In particular, Zhang et al.Finally, we mention XANES studies on silicon nanodots embedded in a SiO 2 film, performed by recording TEY and PLY spectra by the Trento group

Nitride heterostructures and thin films:
GaN and related materials have been intensely studied in recent years in view of the properties which make them attractive for applications: a wide band gap (in blue-violet region), good thermal and chemical stability, and physical hardness. The most common crystal structure of nitrides is the hexagonal wurtzite one but cubic forms are also possible, albeit metastable. The wurtzite structure grows in the (0001) direction and therefore has a polar character which entails strong polarization fields (both intrinsic and piezoelectric). The cubic and hexagonal polytypes of GaN are very similar when viewed along the cubicII shell (a) (b) XEOL TEY R (Å) I shell III shell 60 mA /cm 2 100 mA/cm 2 Fourier transform magnitude (a.u.) 2 3 4 5 6 1 0 0 4 8 12 12 0 4 8 600 500 700 Wavelength (nm) 60 mA /cm 2 100 mA /cm 2 PL intensity (a.u.) 800 900Fig.hexagonal (0001) directions and because the formation of stacking faults is energetically favorable, stabilization of the hexagonal phase is sometimes difficult. An important problem for this class of materials is the absence of substrates with comparable lattice parameters, crystal symmetry and thermal expansion coefficients; the most commonly used substrates are Al 2 O 3 , SiC, and Si. XAFS investigations have contributed to clarify the local atomic structure of nitride alloys, determine the local effect of strain due to heteroepitaxial growth, investigate the relation between the relative fraction of cubic and hexagonal phases of GaN films and the choice of substrate, and finally study the fine details of the local structure of GaN. Miyano et al.The effect of the substrate on the crystal structure of GaN thin films has been studied by Paloura's groupwhere is the angle between the polarization vector and the c-axis of the wurtzite structure and the two cross section terms on the right-hand side do not depend on the angle; for = 54.7°, the so-called magic angle, the measured cross section will be equal to the isotropic one. It is therefore clear that angular-dependent measurements can distinguish between cubic and hexagonal symmetry. An alternative explanation of the method, based on a molecular orbital framework, is reported in the quoted papers. In FigGaN films are highly defective: along with the stacking faults that lie at the origin of the possible presence of both cubic and hexagonal phases, point defects such as N vacancies and Ga antisite defects have a relatively high concentration. This defectivity has been proposed by

Dilute alloy heterostructures:
In recent years, there has been considerable interest in the physical properties of dilute alloy heterostructures, obtained by adding a concentration ranging from $10 À3 to $10 À2 of a foreign atom to the epilayer. Two materials systems will be reviewed: dilute nitrides and DMSs. In these fields, XAFS has played an important role, both as an atomic-level characterization tool to provide crucial feedback to optimize the growth procedures and also for providing an understanding of the physical properties on the basis of the local atomic structure.

Dilute nitrides:
The addition to III-V semiconductor alloys of small quantities of an isoelectronic impurity characterized by very different electronegativity and size with respect to the constituents of the host lattice causes dramatic and unexpected changes in physical properties. For example, the incorporation of a low concentration of nitrogen ($0.1-1%) into GaAs, InGaAs, or GaP (the so-called dilute nitrides) leads to, among others, a giant (and counterintuitive) bandgap reduction and a reduction of the lattice parameter. These effects render dilute nitrides attractive for the fabrication of light emitters in the telecommunications wavelength range and of high-efficiency solar cells. XAFS has been used to address the relative atomic ordering in quaternary dilute nitrides and the structure of the complexes formed upon irradiation with hydrogen.In the quaternary alloy (InGa)(AsN), the relative disposition of cations and anions on their sublattices is not uniquely determined by the atomic concentration. In fact, in the zinc blende structure each site of the anion (cation) sublattice can be occupied by In or Ga (As or N) without any limitation. Therefore, the question of the degree of atomic ordering, i.e., the relative number of each atomic bond as a function of composition, naturally arises. Specific examples of types of atomic ordering are the random case (relative number of each type of bond equal to the concentration) or short-range ordering (SRO); in the relevant case of low N concentration SRO is exhibited, in the extreme cases, by a sample having only N-In or only N-Ga bonds. For (InGa)(AsN) it has been predictedXAFS is clearly the technique of choice to address the issue of atomic ordering, due to its chemical sensistivity, and in 2003 two groups published important results in this field. Lordi et al.Another fascinating physical properties of dilute nitrides alloys is that the dramatic changes induced by nitrogen in dilute nitrides can be reversed fully by hydrogen irradiation. In fact, XRD of hydrogenated GaAsN shows a disappearance of the diffraction peaks associated with the GaAsN epilayer and a recovery of the GaAs lattice parameter. Concomitantly, H irradiation leads to a nearly full reopening of the band gap. Such effects are technologically relevant as hydrogen is present in most growth processes and mass production steps of semiconductor devices. The nature of the hydrogen complexes responsible for these alterations of the physical properties has been addressed by a number of techniques and XAFS has played a decisive role. By combining in an original way N K-edge XANES measurements with simulations of their lineshape in the FMS framework performed on the basis of atomic coordinates obtained by ab initio simulations of the structure of the most stable N-H complexes in hydrogenated GaAsN, Ciatto et al.

Dilute magnetic semiconductors:
A DMS (for a review of work up to 1988, see Ref.A great amount of work has been reported on DMSs, much of it is very recent and the panorama of results is continuously changing; sample deposition procedures are far from optimized and this inevitably entails that it is difficult to draw certain conclusions. For the nitride-and oxide-based systems, the reader is referred to the recent and extensive review by ChambersAs often the case, the first studies in the field were of a preliminary character; for InAs:Mn, Krol et al.For the prototypical GaAs:Mn system more work has been reported. In this system, there is a close interplay between the local structure of Mn and the electronic properties. In fact, by using DFT simulations, Mahadevan and ZungerMore complex GaAs:Mn-based heterostructures have also been studied. Two methods have recently been proposed as alternatives to the growth of bulk GaAs:Mn alloys: the growth of digital GaAs/MnAs heterostructures, obtained by alternately depositing layers of GaAs and MnAs, and d-doping of GaAs with Mn. The latter method consists of creating a d-like doping profile in the growth direction by inserting in GaAs a submonolayer thick Mn layer. In both cases, the basic idea is to achieve locally higher Mn concentrations where high hole densities can be trapped. Soo et al.XAFS has also made a significant contribution for the characterization of Mn-doped GaN films; again, it should be remarked that the nitrides are a more defective materials system than III-Vs and that a significant evolution in the near future is expected as the close interplay between growth and characterization will lead to improved materials. XAFS has provided important results on the site of Mn in GaN and its oxidation state. Soo et al.One of the concerns in the growth of Mn-doped GaN is the presence of multiple oxidation states of Mn and their spatial distribution. In this context, micro-XAFS has provided results that nicely illustrate the potential of the technique. By using an intense spot size of the order of 1 mm 2 , Martı ´nez-Criado et al.

Summary and perspectives:
XAFS has established itself as a precious tool to study the local structure in the field of materials science. The underlying theory, which has been outlined in Section 1, is well understood and a number of reliable analysis programs are now available. Owing to the many possible detection modes, most of which have described in Section 2, it can be applied to a great variety of systems and sensitivity to a particular phase, environment, or part of the sample can be enhanced on the basis of the experimental requirements. As a consequence, applications of XAFS to a wide variety of heterostructures and nanostructures, which have been reviewed in Section 3, have been widespread and have greatly contributed to the present understanding of the relation between atomic structure and physical properties.There is no doubt that in the future XAFS will continue to be a valuable tool in this field of research. It is possible to outline specific areas in which progress is expected. The spatial resolution of synchrotron radiation techniques has greatly improved recentlyTime-resolved XAFS has recently emerged as a very promising field, due to the full use of the time structure of storage rings and the pump-and-probe scheme (for a review, see Ref.Work is in progress and interesting developments are possible also in the quantitative interpretation of the XANES region. XANES spectra contain a wealth of information, especially in view of the three-dimensional sensitivity; at present, even most of the advanced work in the solid state relies on a comparison between simulations and experiments, with semi-quantitative agreement. It would be a significant advancement to develop fitting methods, which have been devised in the field of biomolecules

